The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Old Curiosity Shop, by Charles Dickens

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Old Curiosity Shop

Author: Charles Dickens

Release Date: March 7, 2008 [EBook #700]
Last Updated: September 25, 2016

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8


Produced by An Anonymous Volunteer and David Widger


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE OLD CURIOSITY SHOP ***









The Old Curiosity Shop

By Charles Dickens




CHAPTER 1

Although I am an old man, night is generally my time for walking. In the
summer I often leave home early in the morning, and roam about fields
and lanes all day, or even escape for days or weeks together; but,
saving in the country, I seldom go out until after dark, though, Heaven
be thanked, I love its light and feel the cheerfulness it sheds upon the
earth, as much as any creature living.

I have fallen insensibly into this habit, both because it favours my
infirmity and because it affords me greater opportunity of speculating
on the characters and occupations of those who fill the streets. The
glare and hurry of broad noon are not adapted to idle pursuits like
mine; a glimpse of passing faces caught by the light of a street-lamp
or a shop window is often better for my purpose than their full
revelation in the daylight; and, if I must add the truth, night is
kinder in this respect than day, which too often destroys an air-built
castle at the moment of its completion, without the least ceremony or
remorse.

That constant pacing to and fro, that never-ending restlessness, that
incessant tread of feet wearing the rough stones smooth and glossy--is
it not a wonder how the dwellers in narrows ways can bear to hear it!
Think of a sick man in such a place as Saint Martin’s Court, listening
to the footsteps, and in the midst of pain and weariness obliged,
despite himself (as though it were a task he must perform) to detect
the child’s step from the man’s, the slipshod beggar from the booted
exquisite, the lounging from the busy, the dull heel of the sauntering
outcast from the quick tread of an expectant pleasure-seeker--think of
the hum and noise always being present to his sense, and of the stream
of life that will not stop, pouring on, on, on, through all his
restless dreams, as if he were condemned to lie, dead but conscious, in
a noisy churchyard, and had no hope of rest for centuries to come.

Then, the crowds for ever passing and repassing on the bridges (on
those which are free of toll at last), where many stop on fine evenings
looking listlessly down upon the water with some vague idea that by and
by it runs between green banks which grow wider and wider until at last
it joins the broad vast sea--where some halt to rest from heavy loads
and think as they look over the parapet that to smoke and lounge away
one’s life, and lie sleeping in the sun upon a hot tarpaulin, in a
dull, slow, sluggish barge, must be happiness unalloyed--and where
some, and a very different class, pause with heavier loads than they,
remembering to have heard or read in old time that drowning was not a
hard death, but of all means of suicide the easiest and best.

Covent Garden Market at sunrise too, in the spring or summer, when the
fragrance of sweet flowers is in the air, over-powering even the
unwholesome streams of last night’s debauchery, and driving the dusky
thrush, whose cage has hung outside a garret window all night long,
half mad with joy! Poor bird! the only neighbouring thing at all akin
to the other little captives, some of whom, shrinking from the hot
hands of drunken purchasers, lie drooping on the path already, while
others, soddened by close contact, await the time when they shall be
watered and freshened up to please more sober company, and make old
clerks who pass them on their road to business, wonder what has filled
their breasts with visions of the country.

But my present purpose is not to expatiate upon my walks. The story I
am about to relate, and to which I shall recur at intervals,  arose out
of one of these rambles; and thus I have been led to speak of them by
way of preface.

One night I had roamed into the City, and was walking slowly on in my
usual way, musing upon a great many things, when I was arrested by an
inquiry, the purport of which did not reach me, but which seemed to be
addressed to myself, and was preferred in a soft sweet voice that
struck me very pleasantly. I turned hastily round and found at my elbow
a pretty little girl, who begged to be directed to a certain street at
a considerable distance, and indeed in quite another quarter of the
town.

‘It is a very long way from here,’ said I, ‘my child.’

‘I know that, sir,’ she replied timidly. ‘I am afraid it is a very long
way, for I came from there to-night.’

‘Alone?’ said I, in some surprise.

‘Oh, yes, I don’t mind that, but I am a little frightened now, for I
had lost my road.’

‘And what made you ask it of me? Suppose I should tell you wrong?’

‘I am sure you will not do that,’ said the little creature,’ you are
such a very old gentleman, and walk so slow yourself.’

I cannot describe how much I was impressed by this appeal and the
energy with which it was made, which brought a tear into the child’s
clear eye, and made her slight figure tremble as she looked up into my
face.

‘Come,’ said I, ‘I’ll take you there.’

She put her hand in mine as confidingly as if she had known me from her
cradle, and we trudged away together; the little creature accommodating
her pace to mine, and rather seeming to lead and take care of me than I
to be protecting her. I observed that every now and then she stole a
curious look at my face, as if to make quite sure that I was not
deceiving her, and that these glances (very sharp and keen they were
too) seemed to increase her confidence at every repetition.

For my part, my curiosity and interest were at least equal to the
child’s, for child she certainly was, although I thought it probably
from what I could make out, that her very small and delicate frame
imparted a peculiar youthfulness to her appearance. Though more
scantily attired than she might have been she was dressed with perfect
neatness, and betrayed no marks of poverty or neglect.

‘Who has sent you so far by yourself?’ said I.

‘Someone who is very kind to me, sir.’

‘And what have you been doing?’

‘That, I must not tell,’ said the child firmly.

There was something in the manner of this reply which caused me to look
at the little creature with an involuntary expression of surprise; for
I wondered what kind of errand it might be that occasioned her to be
prepared for questioning. Her quick eye seemed to read my thoughts, for
as it met mine she added that there was no harm in what she had been
doing, but it was a great secret--a secret which she did not even know
herself.

This was said with no appearance of cunning or deceit, but with an
unsuspicious frankness that bore the impress of truth. She walked on as
before, growing more familiar with me as we proceeded and talking
cheerfully by the way, but she said no more about her home, beyond
remarking that we were going quite a new road and asking if it were a
short one.

While we were thus engaged, I revolved in my mind a hundred different
explanations of the riddle and rejected them every one. I really felt
ashamed to take advantage of the ingenuousness or grateful feeling of
the child for the purpose of gratifying my curiosity. I love these
little people; and it is not a slight thing when they, who are so fresh
from God, love us. As I had felt pleased at first by her confidence I
determined to deserve it, and to do credit to the nature which had
prompted her to repose it in me.

There was no reason, however, why I should refrain from seeing the
person who had inconsiderately sent her to so great a distance by night
and alone, and as it was not improbable that if she found herself near
home she might take farewell of me and deprive me of the opportunity, I
avoided the most frequented ways and took the most intricate, and thus
it was not until we arrived in the street itself that she knew where we
were. Clapping her hands with pleasure and running on before me for a
short distance, my little acquaintance stopped at a door and remaining
on the step till I came up knocked at it when I joined her.

A part of this door was of glass unprotected by any shutter, which I
did not observe at first, for all was very dark and silent within, and
I was anxious (as indeed the child was also) for an answer to our
summons. When she had knocked twice or thrice there was a noise as if
some person were moving inside, and at length a faint light appeared
through the glass which, as it approached very slowly, the bearer
having to make his way through a great many scattered articles, enabled
me to see both what kind of person it was who advanced and what kind of
place it was through which he came.

It was an old man with long grey hair, whose face and figure as he held
the light above his head and looked before him as he approached, I
could plainly see. Though much altered by age, I fancied I could
recognize in his spare and slender form something of that delicate
mould which I had noticed in the child. Their bright blue eyes were
certainly alike, but his face was so deeply furrowed and so very full
of care, that here all resemblance ceased.

The place through which he made his way at leisure was one of those
receptacles for old and curious things which seem to crouch in odd
corners of this town and to hide their musty treasures from the public
eye in jealousy and distrust. There were suits of mail standing like
ghosts in armour here and there, fantastic carvings brought from
monkish cloisters, rusty weapons of various kinds, distorted figures in
china and wood and iron and ivory: tapestry and strange furniture that
might have been designed in dreams. The haggard aspect of the little
old man was wonderfully suited to the place; he might have groped among
old churches and tombs and deserted houses and gathered all the spoils
with his own hands. There was nothing in the whole collection but was
in keeping with himself nothing that looked older or more worn than he.

As he turned the key in the lock, he surveyed me with some astonishment
which was not diminished when he looked from me to my companion. The
door being opened, the child addressed him as grandfather, and told him
the little story of our companionship.

‘Why, bless thee, child,’ said the old man, patting her on the head,
‘how couldst thou miss thy way? What if I had lost thee, Nell!’

‘I would have found my way back to YOU, grandfather,’ said the child
boldly; ‘never fear.’

The old man kissed her, then turning to me and begging me to walk in, I
did so. The door was closed and locked. Preceding me with the light, he
led me through the place I had already seen from without, into a small
sitting-room behind, in which was another door opening into a kind of
closet, where I saw a little bed that a fairy might have slept in, it
looked so very small and was so prettily arranged. The child took a
candle and tripped into this little room, leaving the old man and me
together.

‘You must be tired, sir,’ said he as he placed a chair near the fire,
‘how can I thank you?’

‘By taking more care of your grandchild another time, my good friend,’
I replied.

‘More care!’ said the old man in a shrill voice, ‘more care of Nelly!
Why, who ever loved a child as I love Nell?’

He said this with such evident surprise that I was perplexed what
answer to make, and the more so because coupled with something feeble
and wandering in his manner, there were in his face marks of deep and
anxious thought which convinced me that he could not be, as I had been
at first inclined to suppose, in a state of dotage or imbecility.

‘I don’t think you consider--’ I began.

‘I don’t consider!’ cried the old man interrupting me, ‘I don’t
consider her! Ah, how little you know of the truth! Little Nelly,
little Nelly!’

It would be impossible for any man, I care not what his form of speech
might be, to express more affection than the dealer in curiosities did,
in these four words. I waited for him to speak again, but he rested his
chin upon his hand and shaking his head twice or thrice fixed his eyes
upon the fire.

While we were sitting thus in silence, the door of the closet opened,
and the child returned, her light brown hair hanging loose about her
neck, and her face flushed with the haste she had made to rejoin us.
She busied herself immediately in preparing supper, and while she was
thus engaged I remarked that the old man took an opportunity of
observing me more closely than he had done yet. I was surprised to see
that all this time everything was done by the child, and that there
appeared to be no other persons but ourselves in the house. I took
advantage of a moment when she was absent to venture a hint on this
point, to which the old man replied that there were few grown persons
as trustworthy or as careful as she.

‘It always grieves me,’ I observed, roused by what I took to be his
selfishness, ‘it always grieves me to contemplate the initiation of
children into the ways of life, when they are scarcely more than
infants. It checks their confidence and simplicity--two of the best
qualities that Heaven gives them--and demands that they share our
sorrows before they are capable of entering into our enjoyments.’

‘It will never check hers,’ said the old man looking steadily at me,
‘the springs are too deep. Besides, the children of the poor know but
few pleasures. Even the cheap delights of childhood must be bought and
paid for.’

‘But--forgive me for saying this--you are surely not so very
poor’--said I.

‘She is not my child, sir,’ returned the old man. ‘Her mother was, and
she was poor. I save nothing--not a penny--though I live as you see,
but’--he laid his hand upon my arm and leant forward to whisper--‘she
shall be rich one of these days, and a fine lady. Don’t you think ill
of me because I use her help. She gives it cheerfully as you see, and
it would break her heart if she knew that I suffered anybody else to do
for me what her little hands could undertake. I don’t consider!’--he
cried with sudden querulousness, ‘why, God knows that this one child is
the thought and object of my life, and yet he never prospers me--no,
never!’

At this juncture, the subject of our conversation again returned, and
the old man motioning to me to approach the table, broke off, and said
no more.

We had scarcely begun our repast when there was a knock at the door by
which I had entered, and Nell bursting into a hearty laugh, which I was
rejoiced to hear, for it was childlike and full of hilarity, said it
was no doubt dear old Kit coming back at last.

‘Foolish Nell!’ said the old man fondling with her hair. ‘She always
laughs at poor Kit.’

The child laughed again more heartily than before, and I could not help
smiling from pure sympathy. The little old man took up a candle and
went to open the door. When he came back, Kit was at his heels.

Kit was a shock-headed, shambling, awkward lad with an uncommonly wide
mouth, very red cheeks, a turned-up nose, and certainly the most
comical expression of face I ever saw. He stopped short at the door on
seeing a stranger, twirled in his hand a perfectly round old hat
without any vestige of a brim, and resting himself now on one leg and
now on the other and changing them constantly, stood in the doorway,
looking into the parlour with the most extraordinary leer I ever
beheld. I entertained a grateful feeling towards the boy from that
minute, for I felt that he was the comedy of the child’s life.

‘A long way, wasn’t it, Kit?’ said the little old man.

‘Why, then, it was a goodish stretch, master,’ returned Kit.

‘Of course you have come back hungry?’

‘Why, then, I do consider myself rather so, master,’ was the answer.

The lad had a remarkable manner of standing sideways as he spoke, and
thrusting his head forward over his shoulder, as if he could not get at
his voice without that accompanying action. I think he would have
amused one anywhere, but the child’s exquisite enjoyment of his oddity,
and the relief it was to find that there was something she associated
with merriment in a place that appeared so unsuited to her, were quite
irresistible. It was a great point too that Kit himself was flattered
by the sensation he created, and after several efforts to preserve his
gravity, burst into a loud roar, and so stood with his mouth wide open
and his eyes nearly shut, laughing violently.

The old man had again relapsed into his former abstraction and took no
notice of what passed, but I remarked that when her laugh was over, the
child’s bright eyes were dimmed with tears, called forth by the
fullness of heart with which she welcomed her uncouth favourite after
the little anxiety of the night. As for Kit himself (whose laugh had
been all the time one of that sort which very little would change into
a cry) he carried a large slice of bread and meat and a mug of beer
into a corner, and applied himself to disposing of them with great
voracity.

‘Ah!’ said the old man turning to me with a sigh, as if I had spoken to
him but that moment, ‘you don’t know what you say when you tell me that
I don’t consider her.’

‘You must not attach too great weight to a remark founded on first
appearances, my friend,’ said I.

‘No,’ returned the old man thoughtfully, ‘no. Come hither, Nell.’

The little girl hastened from her seat, and put her arm about his neck.

‘Do I love thee, Nell?’ said he. ‘Say--do I love thee, Nell, or no?’

The child only answered by her caresses, and laid her head upon his
breast.

‘Why dost thou sob?’ said the grandfather, pressing her closer to him
and glancing towards me. ‘Is it because thou know’st I love thee, and
dost not like that I should seem to doubt it by my question? Well,
well--then let us say I love thee dearly.’

‘Indeed, indeed you do,’ replied the child with great earnestness, ‘Kit
knows you do.’

Kit, who in despatching his bread and meat had been swallowing
two-thirds of his knife at every mouthful with the coolness of a
juggler, stopped short in his operations on being thus appealed to, and
bawled ‘Nobody isn’t such a fool as to say he doosn’t,’ after which he
incapacitated himself for further conversation by taking a most
prodigious sandwich at one bite.

‘She is poor now’--said the old man, patting the child’s cheek, ‘but I
say again that the time is coming when she shall be rich. It has been a
long time coming, but it must come at last; a very long time, but it
surely must come. It has come to other men who do nothing but waste and
riot. When WILL it come to me!’

‘I am very happy as I am, grandfather,’ said the child.

‘Tush, tush!’ returned the old man, ‘thou dost not know--how should’st
thou!’ then he muttered again between his teeth, ‘The time must come, I
am very sure it must. It will be all the better for coming late’; and
then he sighed and fell into his former musing state, and still holding
the child between his knees appeared to be insensible to everything
around him. By this time it wanted but a few minutes of midnight and I
rose to go, which recalled him to himself.

‘One moment, sir,’ he said, ‘Now, Kit--near midnight, boy, and you
still here! Get home, get home, and be true to your time in the
morning, for there’s work to do. Good night! There, bid him good night,
Nell, and let him be gone!’

‘Good night, Kit,’ said the child, her eyes lighting up with merriment
and kindness.

‘Good night, Miss Nell,’ returned the boy.

‘And thank this gentleman,’ interposed the old man, ‘but for whose care
I might have lost my little girl to-night.’

‘No, no, master,’ said Kit, ‘that won’t do, that won’t.’

‘What do you mean?’ cried the old man.

‘I’d have found her, master,’ said Kit, ‘I’d have found her. I’ll bet
that I’d find her if she was above ground, I would, as quick as
anybody, master. Ha, ha, ha!’

Once more opening his mouth and shutting his eyes, and laughing like a
stentor, Kit gradually backed to the door, and roared himself out.

Free of the room, the boy was not slow in taking his departure; when he
had gone, and the child was occupied in clearing the table, the old man
said:

‘I haven’t seemed to thank you, sir, for what you have done to-night,
but I do thank you humbly and heartily, and so does she, and her thanks
are better worth than mine. I should be sorry that you went away, and
thought I was unmindful of your goodness, or careless of her--I am not
indeed.’

I was sure of that, I said, from what I had seen. ‘But,’ I added, ‘may
I ask you a question?’

‘Ay, sir,’ replied the old man, ‘What is it?’

‘This delicate child,’ said I, ‘with so much beauty and
intelligence--has she nobody to care for her but you? Has she no other
companion or advisor?’

‘No,’ he returned, looking anxiously in my face, ‘no, and she wants no
other.’

‘But are you not fearful,’ said I, ‘that you may misunderstand a charge
so tender? I am sure you mean well, but are you quite certain that you
know how to execute such a trust as this? I am an old man, like you,
and I am actuated by an old man’s concern in all that is young and
promising. Do you not think that what I have seen of you and this
little creature to-night must have an interest not wholly free from
pain?’

‘Sir,’ rejoined the old man after a moment’s silence. ‘I have no right
to feel hurt at what you say. It is true that in many respects I am the
child, and she the grown person--that you have seen already. But waking
or sleeping, by night or day, in sickness or health, she is the one
object of my care, and if you knew of how much care, you would look on
me with different eyes, you would indeed. Ah! It’s a weary life for an
old man--a weary, weary life--but there is a great end to gain and that
I keep before me.’

Seeing that he was in a state of excitement and impatience, I turned to
put on an outer coat which I had thrown off on entering the room,
purposing to say no more. I was surprised to see the child standing
patiently by with a cloak upon her arm, and in her hand a hat, and
stick.

‘Those are not mine, my dear,’ said I.

‘No,’ returned the child, ‘they are grandfather’s.’

‘But he is not going out to-night.’

‘Oh, yes, he is,’ said the child, with a smile.

‘And what becomes of you, my pretty one?’

‘Me! I stay here of course. I always do.’

I looked in astonishment towards the old man, but he was, or feigned to
be, busied in the arrangement of his dress. From him I looked back to
the slight gentle figure of the child. Alone! In that gloomy place all
the long, dreary night.

She evinced no consciousness of my surprise, but cheerfully helped the
old man with his cloak, and when he was ready took a candle to light us
out. Finding that we did not follow as she expected, she looked back
with a smile and waited for us.  The old man showed by his face that he
plainly understood the cause of my hesitation, but he merely signed to
me with an inclination of the head to pass out of the room before him,
and remained silent. I had no resource but to comply.

When we reached the door, the child setting down the candle, turned to
say good night and raised her face to kiss me. Then she ran to the old
man, who folded her in his arms and bade God bless her.

‘Sleep soundly, Nell,’ he said in a low voice, ‘and angels guard thy
bed! Do not forget thy prayers, my sweet.’

‘No, indeed,’ answered the child fervently, ‘they make me feel so
happy!’

‘That’s well; I know they do; they should,’ said the old man. ‘Bless
thee a hundred times! Early in the morning I shall be home.’

‘You’ll not ring twice,’ returned the child. ‘The bell wakes me, even
in the middle of a dream.’

With this, they separated. The child opened the door (now guarded by a
shutter which I had heard the boy put up before he left the house) and
with another farewell whose clear and tender note I have recalled a
thousand times, held it until we had passed out. The old man paused a
moment while it was gently closed and fastened on the inside, and
satisfied that this was done, walked on at a slow pace. At the
street-corner he stopped, and regarding me with a troubled countenance
said that our ways were widely different and that he must take his
leave. I would have spoken, but summoning up more alacrity than might
have been expected in one of his appearance, he hurried away. I could
see that twice or thrice he looked back as if to ascertain if I were
still watching him, or perhaps to assure himself that I was not
following at a distance. The obscurity of the night favoured his
disappearance, and his figure was soon beyond my sight.

I remained standing on the spot where he had left me, unwilling to
depart, and yet unknowing why I should loiter there. I looked wistfully
into the street we had lately quitted, and after a time directed my
steps that way. I passed and repassed the house, and stopped and
listened at the door; all was dark, and silent as the grave.

Yet I lingered about, and could not tear myself away, thinking of all
possible harm that might happen to the child--of fires and robberies
and even murder--and feeling as if some evil must ensue if I turned my
back upon the place. The closing of a door or window in the street
brought me before the curiosity-dealer’s once more; I crossed the road
and looked up at the house to assure myself that the noise had not come
from there. No, it was black, cold, and lifeless as before.

There were few passengers astir; the street was sad and dismal, and
pretty well my own. A few stragglers from the theatres hurried by, and
now and then I turned aside to avoid some noisy drunkard as he reeled
homewards, but these interruptions were not frequent and soon ceased.
The clocks struck one. Still I paced up and down, promising myself that
every time should be the last, and breaking faith with myself on some
new plea as often as I did so.

The more I thought of what the old man had said, and of his looks and
bearing, the less I could account for what I had seen and heard. I had
a strong misgiving that his nightly absence was for no good purpose. I
had only come to know the fact through the innocence of the child, and
though the old man was by at the time, and saw my undisguised surprise,
he had preserved a strange mystery upon the subject and offered no word
of explanation. These reflections naturally recalled again more
strongly than before his haggard face, his wandering manner, his
restless anxious looks. His affection for the child might not be
inconsistent with villany of the worst kind; even that very affection
was in itself an extraordinary contradiction, or how could he leave her
thus? Disposed as I was to think badly of him, I never doubted that his
love for her was real. I could not admit the thought, remembering what
had passed between us, and the tone of voice in which he had called her
by her name.

‘Stay here of course,’ the child had said in answer to my question, ‘I
always do!’ What could take him from home by night, and every night! I
called up all the strange tales I had ever heard of dark and secret
deeds committed in great towns and escaping detection for a long series
of years; wild as many of these stories were, I could not find one
adapted to this mystery, which only became the more impenetrable, in
proportion as I sought to solve it.

Occupied with such thoughts as these, and a crowd of others all tending
to the same point, I continued to pace the street for two long hours;
at length the rain began to descend heavily, and then over-powered by
fatigue though no less interested than I had been at first, I engaged
the nearest coach and so got home. A cheerful fire was blazing on the
hearth, the lamp burnt brightly, my clock received me with its old
familiar welcome; everything was quiet, warm and cheering, and in happy
contrast to the gloom and darkness I had quitted.

But all that night, waking or in my sleep, the same thoughts recurred
and the same images retained possession of my brain. I had ever before
me the old dark murky rooms--the gaunt suits of mail with their ghostly
silent air--the faces all awry, grinning from wood and stone--the dust
and rust and worm that lives in wood--and alone in the midst of all
this lumber and decay and ugly age, the beautiful child in her gentle
slumber, smiling through her light and sunny dreams.




CHAPTER 2

After combating, for nearly a week, the feeling which impelled me to
revisit the place I had quitted under the circumstances already
detailed, I yielded to it at length; and determining that this time I
would present myself by the light of day, bent my steps thither early
in the morning.

I walked past the house, and took several turns in the street, with
that kind of hesitation which is natural to a man who is conscious that
the visit he is about to pay is unexpected, and may not be very
acceptable. However, as the door of the shop was shut, and it did not
appear likely that I should be recognized by those within, if I
continued merely to pass up and down before it, I soon conquered this
irresolution, and found myself in the Curiosity Dealer’s warehouse.

The old man and another person were together in the back part, and
there seemed to have been high words between them, for their voices
which were raised to a very high pitch suddenly stopped on my entering,
and the old man advancing hastily towards me, said in a tremulous tone
that he was very glad I had come.

‘You interrupted us at a critical moment,’ said he, pointing to the man
whom I had found in company with him; ‘this fellow will murder me one
of these days. He would have done so, long ago, if he had dared.’

‘Bah! You would swear away my life if you could,’ returned the other,
after bestowing a stare and a frown on me; ‘we all know that!’

‘I almost think I could,’ cried the old man, turning feebly upon him.
‘If oaths, or prayers, or words, could rid me of you, they should. I
would be quit of you, and would be relieved if you were dead.’

‘I know it,’ returned the other. ‘I said so, didn’t I? But neither
oaths, or prayers, nor words, WILL kill me, and therefore I live, and
mean to live.’

‘And his mother died!’ cried the old man, passionately clasping his
hands and looking upward; ‘and this is Heaven’s justice!’

The other stood lounging with his foot upon a chair, and regarded him
with a contemptuous sneer. He was a young man of one-and-twenty or
thereabouts; well made, and certainly handsome, though the expression
of his face was far from prepossessing, having in common with his
manner and even his dress, a dissipated, insolent air which repelled
one.

‘Justice or no justice,’ said the young fellow, ‘here I am and here I
shall stop till such time as I think fit to go, unless you send for
assistance to put me out--which you won’t do, I know. I tell you again
that I want to see my sister.’

‘YOUR sister!’ said the old man bitterly.

‘Ah! You can’t change the relationship,’ returned the other. ‘If you
could, you’d have done it long ago. I want to see my sister, that you
keep cooped up here, poisoning her mind with your sly secrets and
pretending an affection for her that you may work her to death, and add
a few scraped shillings every week to the money you can hardly count. I
want to see her; and I will.’

‘Here’s a moralist to talk of poisoned minds! Here’s a generous spirit
to scorn scraped-up shillings!’ cried the old man, turning from him to
me. ‘A profligate, sir, who has forfeited every claim not only upon
those who have the misfortune to be of his blood, but upon society
which knows nothing of him but his misdeeds. A liar too,’ he added, in
a lower voice as he drew closer to me, ‘who knows how dear she is to
me, and seeks to wound me even there, because there is a stranger
nearby.’

‘Strangers are nothing to me, grandfather,’ said the young fellow
catching at the word, ‘nor I to them, I hope. The best they can do, is
to keep an eye to their business and leave me to mine. There’s a friend
of mine waiting outside, and as it seems that I may have to wait some
time, I’ll call him in, with your leave.’

Saying this, he stepped to the door, and looking down the street
beckoned several times to some unseen person, who, to judge from the
air of impatience with which these signals were accompanied, required a
great quantity of persuasion to induce him to advance. At length there
sauntered up, on the opposite side of the way--with a bad pretense of
passing by accident--a figure conspicuous for its dirty smartness,
which after a great many frowns and jerks of the head, in resistance of
the invitation, ultimately crossed the road and was brought into the
shop.

‘There. It’s Dick Swiveller,’ said the young fellow, pushing him in.
‘Sit down, Swiveller.’

‘But is the old min agreeable?’ said Mr Swiveller in an undertone.

Mr Swiveller complied, and looking about him with a propitiatory smile,
observed that last week was a fine week for the ducks, and this week
was a fine week for the dust; he also observed that whilst standing by
the post at the street-corner, he had observed a pig with a straw in
his mouth issuing out of the tobacco-shop, from which appearance he
augured that another fine week for the ducks was approaching, and that
rain would certainly ensue. He furthermore took occasion to apologize
for any negligence that might be perceptible in his dress, on the
ground that last night he had had ‘the sun very strong in his eyes’; by
which expression he was understood to convey to his hearers in the most
delicate manner possible, the information that he had been extremely
drunk.

‘But what,’ said Mr Swiveller with a sigh, ‘what is the odds so long as
the fire of soul is kindled at the taper of conwiviality, and the wing
of friendship never moults a feather! What is the odds so long as the
spirit is expanded by means of rosy wine, and the present moment is the
least happiest of our existence!’

‘You needn’t act the chairman here,’ said his friend, half aside.

‘Fred!’ cried Mr Swiveller, tapping his nose, ‘a word to the wise is
sufficient for them--we may be good and happy without riches, Fred.
Say not another syllable. I know my cue; smart is the word. Only one
little whisper, Fred--is the old min friendly?’

‘Never you mind,’ replied his friend.

‘Right again, quite right,’ said Mr Swiveller, ‘caution is the word,
and caution is the act.’ with that, he winked as if in preservation of
some deep secret, and folding his arms and leaning back in his chair,
looked up at the ceiling with profound gravity.

It was perhaps not very unreasonable to suspect from what had already
passed, that Mr Swiveller was not quite recovered from the effects of
the powerful sunlight to which he had made allusion; but if no such
suspicion had been awakened by his speech, his wiry hair, dull eyes,
and sallow face would still have been strong witnesses against him. His
attire was not, as he had himself hinted, remarkable for the  nicest
arrangement, but was in a state of disorder which strongly induced the
idea that he had gone to bed in it. It consisted of a brown body-coat
with a great many brass buttons up the front and only one behind, a
bright check neckerchief, a plaid waistcoat, soiled white trousers, and
a very limp hat, worn with the wrong side foremost, to hide a hole in
the brim. The breast of his coat was ornamented with an outside pocket
from which there peeped forth the cleanest end of a very large and very
ill-favoured handkerchief; his dirty wristbands were pulled on as far
as possible and ostentatiously folded back over his cuffs; he displayed
no gloves, and carried a yellow cane having at the top a bone hand with
the semblance of a ring on its little finger and a black ball in its
grasp. With all these personal advantages (to which may be added a
strong savour of tobacco-smoke, and a prevailing greasiness of
appearance) Mr Swiveller leant back in his chair with his eyes fixed on
the ceiling, and occasionally pitching his voice to the needful key,
obliged the company with a few bars of an intensely dismal air, and
then, in the middle of a note, relapsed into his former silence.

The old man sat himself down in a chair, and with folded hands, looked
sometimes at his grandson and sometimes at his strange companion, as if
he were utterly powerless and had no resource but to leave them to do
as they pleased. The young man reclined against a table at no great
distance from his friend, in apparent indifference to everything that
had passed; and I--who felt the difficulty of any interference,
notwithstanding that the old man had appealed to me, both by words and
looks--made the best feint I could of being occupied in examining some
of the goods that were disposed for sale, and paying very little
attention to a person before me.

The silence was not of long duration, for Mr Swiveller, after favouring
us with several melodious assurances that his heart was in the
Highlands, and that he wanted but his Arab steed as a preliminary to
the achievement of great feats of valour and loyalty, removed his eyes
from the ceiling and subsided into prose again.

‘Fred,’ said Mr Swiveller stopping short, as if the idea had suddenly
occurred to him, and speaking in the same audible whisper as before,
‘is the old min friendly?’

‘What does it matter?’ returned his friend peevishly.

‘No, but IS he?’ said Dick.

‘Yes, of course. What do I care whether he is or not?’

Emboldened as it seemed by this reply to enter into a more general
conversation, Mr Swiveller plainly laid himself out to captivate our
attention.

He began by remarking that soda-water, though a good thing in the
abstract, was apt to lie cold upon the stomach unless qualified with
ginger, or a small infusion of brandy, which latter article he held to
be preferable in all cases, saving for the one consideration of
expense. Nobody venturing to dispute these positions, he proceeded to
observe that the human hair was a great retainer of tobacco-smoke, and
that the young gentlemen of Westminster and Eton, after eating vast
quantities of apples to conceal any scent of cigars from their anxious
friends, were usually detected in consequence of their heads possessing
this remarkable property; when he concluded that if the Royal Society
would turn their attention to the circumstance, and endeavour to find
in the resources of science a means of preventing such untoward
revelations, they might indeed be looked upon as benefactors to
mankind. These opinions being equally incontrovertible with those he
had already pronounced, he went on to inform us that Jamaica rum,
though unquestionably an agreeable spirit of great richness and
flavour, had the drawback of remaining constantly present to the taste
next day; and nobody being venturous enough to argue this point either,
he increased in confidence and became yet more companionable and
communicative.

‘It’s a devil of a thing, gentlemen,’ said Mr Swiveller, ‘when
relations fall out and disagree. If the wing of friendship should never
moult a feather, the wing of relationship should never be clipped, but
be always expanded and serene. Why should a grandson and grandfather
peg away at each other with mutual wiolence when all might be bliss and
concord. Why not jine hands and forgit it?’

‘Hold your tongue,’ said his friend.

‘Sir,’ replied Mr Swiveller, ‘don’t you interrupt the chair.
Gentlemen, how does the case stand, upon the present occasion?  Here is
a jolly old grandfather--I say it with the utmost respect--and here is
a wild, young grandson. The jolly old grandfather says to the wild
young grandson, “I have brought you up and educated you, Fred; I have
put you in the way of getting on in life; you have bolted a little out
of course, as young fellows often do; and you shall never have another
chance, nor the ghost of half a one.”  The wild young grandson makes
answer to this and says, “You’re as rich as rich can be; you have been
at no uncommon expense on my account, you’re saving up piles of money
for my little sister that lives with you in a secret, stealthy,
hugger-muggering kind of way and with no manner of enjoyment--why can’t
you stand a trifle for your grown-up relation?” The jolly old
grandfather unto this, retorts, not only that he declines to fork out
with that cheerful readiness which is always so agreeable and pleasant
in a gentleman of his time of life, but that he will bow up, and call
names, and make reflections whenever they meet. Then the plain question
is, an’t it a pity that this state of things should continue, and how
much better would it be for the gentleman to hand over a reasonable
amount of tin, and make it all right and comfortable?’

Having delivered this oration with a great many waves and flourishes of
the hand, Mr Swiveller abruptly thrust the head of his cane into his
mouth as if to prevent himself from impairing the effect of his speech
by adding one other word.

‘Why do you hunt and persecute me, God help me!’ said the old man
turning to his grandson. ‘Why do you bring your prolifigate companions
here? How often am I to tell you that my life is one of care and
self-denial, and that I am poor?’

‘How often am I to tell you,’ returned the other, looking coldly at
him, ‘that I know better?’

‘You have chosen your own path,’ said the old man. ‘Follow it.  Leave
Nell and me to toil and work.’

‘Nell will be a woman soon,’ returned the other, ‘and, bred in your
faith, she’ll forget her brother unless he shows himself sometimes.’

‘Take care,’ said the old man with sparkling eyes, ‘that she does not
forget you when you would have her memory keenest. Take care that the
day don’t come when you walk barefoot in the streets, and she rides by
in a gay carriage of her own.’

‘You mean when she has your money?’ retorted the other. ‘How like a
poor man he talks!’

‘And yet,’ said the old man dropping his voice and speaking like one
who thinks aloud, ‘how poor we are, and what a life it is! The cause is
a young child’s guiltless of all harm or wrong, but nothing goes well
with it! Hope and patience, hope and patience!’

These words were uttered in too low a tone to reach the ears of the
young men.  Mr Swiveller appeared to think that they implied some mental
struggle consequent upon the powerful effect of his address, for he
poked his friend with his cane and whispered his conviction that he had
administered ‘a clincher,’ and that he expected a commission on the
profits. Discovering his mistake after a while, he appeared to grow
rather sleepy and discontented, and had more than once suggested the
propriety of an immediate departure, when the door opened, and the
child herself appeared.




CHAPTER 3

The child was closely followed by an elderly man of remarkably hard
features and forbidding aspect, and so low in stature as to be quite a
dwarf, though his head and face were large enough for the body of a
giant. His black eyes were restless, sly, and cunning; his mouth and
chin, bristly with the stubble of a coarse hard beard; and his
complexion was one of that kind which never looks clean or wholesome.
But what added most to the grotesque expression of his face was a
ghastly smile, which, appearing to be the mere result of habit and to
have no connection with any mirthful or complacent feeling, constantly
revealed the few discoloured fangs that were yet scattered in his
mouth, and gave him the aspect of a panting dog. His dress consisted of
a large high-crowned hat, a worn dark suit, a pair of capacious shoes,
and a dirty white neckerchief sufficiently limp and crumpled to
disclose the greater portion of his wiry throat. Such hair as he had
was of a grizzled black, cut short and straight upon his temples, and
hanging in a frowzy fringe about his ears. His hands, which were of a
rough, coarse grain, were very dirty; his fingernails were crooked,
long, and yellow.

There was ample time to note these particulars, for besides that they
were sufficiently obvious without very close observation, some moments
elapsed before any one broke silence. The child advanced timidly
towards her brother and put her hand in his, the dwarf (if we may call
him so) glanced keenly at all present, and the curiosity-dealer, who
plainly had not expected his uncouth visitor, seemed disconcerted and
embarrassed.

‘Ah!’ said the dwarf, who with his hand stretched out above his eyes
had been surveying the young man attentively, ‘that should be your
grandson, neighbour!’

‘Say rather that he should not be,’ replied the old man. ‘But he is.’

‘And that?’ said the dwarf, pointing to Dick Swiveller.

‘Some friend of his, as welcome here as he,’ said the old man.

‘And that?’ inquired the dwarf, wheeling round and pointing straight at
me.

‘A gentleman who was so good as to bring Nell home the other night when
she lost her way, coming from your house.’

The little man turned to the child as if to chide her or express his
wonder, but as she was talking to the young man, held his peace, and
bent his head to listen.

‘Well, Nelly,’ said the young fellow aloud. ‘Do they teach you to hate
me, eh?’

‘No, no. For shame. Oh, no!’ cried the child.

‘To love me, perhaps?’ pursued her brother with a sneer.

‘To do neither,’ she returned. ‘They never speak to me about you.
Indeed they never do.’

‘I dare be bound for that,’ he said, darting a bitter look at the
grandfather. ‘I dare be bound for that Nell. Oh! I believe you there!’

‘But I love you dearly, Fred,’ said the child.

‘No doubt!’

‘I do indeed, and always will,’ the child repeated with great emotion,
‘but oh! If you would leave off vexing him and making him unhappy, then
I could love you more.’

‘I see!’ said the young man, as he stooped carelessly over the child,
and having kissed her, pushed her from him: ‘There--get you away now
you have said your lesson. You needn’t whimper. We part good friends
enough, if that’s the matter.’

He remained silent, following her with his eyes, until she had gained
her little room and closed the door; and then turning to the dwarf,
said abruptly,

‘Harkee, Mr--’

‘Meaning me?’ returned the dwarf. ‘Quilp is my name. You might
remember. It’s not a long one--Daniel Quilp.’

‘Harkee, Mr Quilp, then,’ pursued the other, ‘You have some influence
with my grandfather there.’

‘Some,’ said Mr Quilp emphatically.

‘And are in a few of his mysteries and secrets.’

‘A few,’ replied Quilp, with equal dryness.

‘Then let me tell him once for all, through you, that I will come into
and go out of this place as often as I like, so long as he keeps Nell
here; and that if he wants to be quit of me, he must first be quit of
her. What have I done to be made a bugbear of, and to be shunned and
dreaded as if I brought the plague? He’ll tell you that I have no
natural affection; and that I care no more for Nell, for her own sake,
than I do for him. Let him say so. I care for the whim, then, of coming
to and fro and reminding her of my existence. I WILL see her when I
please. That’s my point. I came here to-day to maintain it, and I’ll
come here again fifty times with the same object and always with the
same success. I said I would stop till I had gained it.  I have done
so, and now my visit’s ended. Come Dick.’

‘Stop!’ cried Mr Swiveller, as his companion turned toward the door.
‘Sir!’

‘Sir, I am your humble servant,’ said Mr Quilp, to whom the
monosyllable was addressed.

‘Before I leave the gay and festive scene, and halls of dazzling light,
sir,’ said Mr Swiveller, ‘I will with your permission, attempt a slight
remark. I came here, sir, this day, under the impression that the old
min was friendly.’

‘Proceed, sir,’ said Daniel Quilp; for the orator had made a sudden
stop.

‘Inspired by this idea and the sentiments it awakened, sir, and feeling
as a mutual friend that badgering, baiting, and bullying, was not the
sort of thing calculated to expand the souls and promote the social
harmony of the contending parties, I took upon myself to suggest a
course which is THE course to be adopted to the present occasion.  Will
you allow me to whisper half a syllable, sir?’

Without waiting for the permission he sought, Mr Swiveller stepped up
to the dwarf, and leaning on his shoulder and stooping down to get at
his ear, said in a voice which was perfectly audible to all present,

‘The watch-word to the old min is--fork.’

‘Is what?’ demanded Quilp.

‘Is fork, sir, fork,’ replied Mr Swiveller slapping his pocket. ‘You
are awake, sir?’

The dwarf nodded. Mr Swiveller drew back and nodded likewise, then drew
a little further back and nodded again, and so on. By these means he in
time reached the door, where he gave a great cough to attract the
dwarf’s attention and gain an opportunity of expressing in dumb show,
the closest confidence and most inviolable secrecy.  Having performed
the serious pantomime that was necessary for the due conveyance of
these idea, he cast himself upon his friend’s track, and vanished.

‘Humph!’ said the dwarf with a sour look and a shrug of his shoulders,
‘so much for dear relations. Thank God I acknowledge none! Nor need you
either,’ he added, turning to the old man, ‘if you were not as weak as
a reed, and nearly as senseless.’

‘What would you have me do?’ he retorted in a kind of helpless
desperation. ‘It is easy to talk and sneer. What would you have me do?’

‘What would I do if I was in your case?’ said the dwarf.

‘Something violent, no doubt.’

‘You’re right there,’ returned the little man, highly gratified by the
compliment, for such he evidently considered it; and grinning like a
devil as he rubbed his dirty hands together. ‘Ask Mrs Quilp, pretty Mrs
Quilp, obedient, timid, loving Mrs Quilp. But that reminds me--I have
left her all alone, and she will be anxious and know not a moment’s
peace till I return. I know she’s always in that condition when I’m
away, thought she doesn’t dare to say so, unless I lead her on and tell
her she may speak freely and I won’t be angry with her.  Oh!
well-trained Mrs Quilp.’

The creature appeared quite horrible with his monstrous head and little
body, as he rubbed his hands slowly round, and round, and round
again--with something fantastic even in his manner of performing this
slight action--and, dropping his shaggy brows and cocking his chin in
the air, glanced upward with a stealthy look of exultation that an imp
might have copied and appropriated to himself.

‘Here,’ he said, putting his hand into his breast and sidling up to the
old man as he spoke; ‘I brought it myself for fear of accidents, as,
being in gold, it was something large and heavy for Nell to carry in
her bag. She need be accustomed to such loads betimes though,
neighbor, for she will carry weight when you are dead.’

‘Heaven send she may! I hope so,’ said the old man with something like
a groan.

‘Hope so!’ echoed the dwarf, approaching close to his ear; ‘neighbour,
I would I knew in what good investment all these supplies are sunk. But
you are a deep man, and keep your secret close.’

‘My secret!’ said the other with a haggard look. ‘Yes, you’re
right--I--I--keep it close--very close.’

He said no more, but taking the money turned away with a slow,
uncertain step, and pressed his hand upon his head like a weary and
dejected man. The dwarf watched him sharply, while he passed into the
little sitting-room and locked it in an iron safe above the
chimney-piece; and after musing for a short space, prepared to take his
leave, observing that unless he made good haste, Mrs Quilp would
certainly be in fits on his return.

‘And so, neighbour,’ he added, ‘I’ll turn my face homewards, leaving my
love for Nelly and hoping she may never lose her way again, though her
doing so HAS procured me an honour I didn’t expect.’ With that he bowed
and leered at me, and with a keen glance around which seemed to
comprehend every object within his range of vision, however, small or
trivial, went his way.

I had several times essayed to go myself, but the old man had always
opposed it and entreated me to remain. As he renewed his entreaties on
our being left along, and adverted with many thanks to the former
occasion of our being together, I willingly yielded to his persuasions,
and sat down, pretending to examine some curious miniatures and a few
old medals which he placed before me. It needed no great pressing to
induce me to stay, for if my curiosity has been excited on the occasion
of my first visit, it certainly was not diminished now.

Nell joined us before long, and bringing some needle-work to the table,
sat by the old man’s side. It was pleasant to observe the fresh flowers
in the room, the pet bird with a green bough shading his little cage,
the breath of freshness and youth which seemed to rustle through the
old dull house and hover round the child. It was curious, but not so
pleasant, to turn from the beauty and grace of the girl, to the
stooping figure, care-worn face, and jaded aspect of the old man.  As
he grew weaker and more feeble, what would become of this lonely little
creature; poor protector as he was, say that he died--what would be her
fate, then?

The old man almost answered my thoughts, as he laid his hand on hers,
and spoke aloud.

‘I’ll be of better cheer, Nell,’ he said; ‘there must be good fortune
in store for thee--I do not ask it for myself, but thee. Such miseries
must fall on thy innocent head without it, that I cannot believe but
that, being tempted, it will come at last!’

She looked cheerfully into his face, but made no answer.

‘When I think,’ said he, ‘of the many years--many in thy short
life--that thou has lived with me; of my monotonous existence, knowing
no companions of thy own age nor any childish pleasures; of the
solitude in which thou has grown to be what thou art, and in which thou
hast lived apart from nearly all thy kind but one old man; I sometimes
fear I have dealt hardly by thee, Nell.’

‘Grandfather!’ cried the child in unfeigned surprise.

‘Not in intention--no no,’ said he. ‘I have ever looked forward to the
time that should enable thee to mix among the gayest and prettiest, and
take thy station with the best. But I still look forward, Nell, I still
look forward, and if I should be forced to leave thee, meanwhile, how
have I fitted thee for struggles with the world? The poor bird yonder
is as well qualified to encounter it, and be turned adrift upon its
mercies--Hark! I hear Kit outside. Go to him, Nell, go to him.’

She rose, and hurrying away, stopped, turned back, and put her arms
about the old man’s neck, then left him and hurried away again--but
faster this time, to hide her falling tears.

‘A word in your ear, sir,’ said the old man in a hurried whisper. ‘I
have been rendered uneasy by what you said the other night, and can
only plead that I have done all for the best--that it is too late to
retract, if I could (though I cannot)--and that I hope to triumph yet.
All is for her sake. I have borne great poverty myself, and would spare
her the sufferings that poverty carries with it. I would spare her the
miseries that brought her mother, my own dear child, to an early grave.
I would leave her--not with resources which could be easily spent or
squandered away, but with what would place her beyond the reach of want
for ever. You mark me sir? She shall have no pittance, but a
fortune--Hush! I can say no more than that, now or at any other time,
and she is here again!’

The eagerness with which all this was poured into my ear, the trembling
of the hand with which he clasped my arm, the strained and starting
eyes he fixed upon me, the wild vehemence and agitation of his manner,
filled me with amazement. All that I had heard and seen, and a great
part of what he had said himself, led me to suppose that he was a
wealthy man. I could form no comprehension of his character, unless he
were one of those miserable wretches who, having made gain the sole end
and object of their lives and having succeeded in amassing great
riches, are constantly tortured by the dread of poverty, and beset by
fears of loss and ruin. Many things he had said which I had been at a
loss to understand, were quite reconcilable with the idea thus
presented to me, and at length I concluded that beyond all doubt he was
one of this unhappy race.

The opinion was not the result of hasty consideration, for which indeed
there was no opportunity at that time, as the child came directly, and
soon occupied herself in preparations for giving Kit a writing lesson,
of which it seemed he had a couple every week, and one regularly on
that evening, to the great mirth and enjoyment both of himself and his
instructress. To relate how it was a long time before his modesty could
be so far prevailed upon as it admit of his sitting down in the
parlour, in the presence of an unknown gentleman--how, when he did set
down, he tucked up his sleeves and squared his elbows and put his face
close to the copy-book and squinted horribly at the lines--how, from
the very first moment of having the pen in his hand, he began to wallow
in blots, and to daub himself with ink up to the very roots of his
hair--how, if he did by accident form a letter properly, he immediately
smeared it out again with his arm in his preparations to make
another--how, at every fresh mistake, there was a fresh burst of
merriment from the child and louder and not less hearty laugh from poor
Kit himself--and how there was all the way through, notwithstanding, a
gentle wish on her part to teach, and an anxious desire on his to
learn--to relate all these particulars would no doubt occupy more space
and time than they deserve. It will be sufficient to say that the
lesson was given--that evening passed and night came on--that the old
man again grew restless and impatient--that he quitted the house
secretly at the same hour as before--and that the child was once more
left alone within its gloomy walls.

And now that I have carried this history so far in my own character and
introduced these personages to the reader, I shall for the convenience
of the narrative detach myself from its further course, and leave those
who have prominent and necessary parts in it to speak and act for
themselves.




CHAPTER 4

Mr and Mrs Quilp resided on Tower Hill; and in her bower on Tower Hill
Mrs Quilp was left to pine the absence of her lord, when he quitted her
on the business which he had already seen to transact.

Mr Quilp could scarcely be said to be of any particular trade or
calling, though his pursuits were diversified and his occupations
numerous. He collected the rents of whole colonies of filthy streets
and alleys by the waterside, advanced money to the seamen and petty
officers of merchant vessels, had a share in the ventures of divers
mates of East Indiamen, smoked his smuggled cigars under the very nose
of the Custom House, and made appointments on ‘Change with men in
glazed hats and round jackets pretty well every day. On the Surrey side
of the river was a small rat-infested dreary yard called ‘Quilp’s
Wharf,’ in which were a little wooden counting-house burrowing all awry
in the dust as if it had fallen from the clouds and ploughed into the
ground; a few fragments of rusty anchors; several large iron rings;
some piles of rotten wood; and two or three heaps of old sheet copper,
crumpled, cracked, and battered. On Quilp’s Wharf, Daniel Quilp was a
ship-breaker, yet to judge from these appearances he must either have
been a ship-breaker on a very small scale, or have broken his ships up
very small indeed. Neither did the place present any extraordinary
aspect of life or activity, as its only human occupant was an
amphibious boy in a canvas suit, whose sole change of occupation was
from sitting on the head of a pile and throwing stones into the mud
when the tide was out, to standing with his hands in his pockets gazing
listlessly on the motion and on the bustle of the river at high-water.

The dwarf’s lodging on Tower hill comprised, besides the needful
accommodation for himself and Mrs Quilp, a small sleeping-closet for
that lady’s mother, who resided with the couple and waged perpetual war
with Daniel; of whom, notwithstanding, she stood in no slight dread.
Indeed, the ugly creature contrived by some means or other--whether by
his ugliness or his ferocity or his natural cunning is no great
matter--to impress with a wholesome fear of his anger, most of those
with whom he was brought into daily contact and communication. Over
nobody had he such complete ascendance as Mrs Quilp herself--a pretty
little, mild-spoken, blue-eyed woman, who having allied herself in
wedlock to the dwarf in one of those strange infatuations of which
examples are by no means scarce, performed a sound practical penance
for her folly, every day of her life.

It has been said that Mrs Quilp was pining in her bower. In her bower
she was, but not alone, for besides the old lady her mother of whom
mention has recently been made, there were present some half-dozen
ladies of the neighborhood who had happened by a strange accident (and
also by a little understanding among themselves) to drop in one after
another, just about tea-time. This being a season favourable to
conversation, and the room being a cool, shady, lazy kind of place,
with some plants at the open window shutting out the dust, and
interposing pleasantly enough between the tea table within and the old
Tower without, it is no wonder that the ladies felt an inclination to
talk and linger, especially when there are taken into account the
additional inducements of fresh butter, new bread, shrimps, and
watercresses.

Now, the ladies being together under these circumstances, it was
extremely natural that the discourse should turn upon the propensity of
mankind to tyrannize over the weaker sex, and the duty that developed
upon the weaker sex to resist that tyranny and assert their rights and
dignity. It was natural for four reasons: firstly, because Mrs Quilp
being a young woman and notoriously under the dominion of her husband
ought to be excited to rebel; secondly, because Mrs Quilp’s parent was
known to be laudably shrewish in her disposition and inclined to resist
male authority; thirdly, because each visitor wished to show for
herself how superior she was in this respect to the generality of her
sex; and fourthly, because the company being accustomed to scandalise
each other in pairs, were deprived of their usual subject of
conversation now that they were all assembled in close friendship, and
had consequently no better employment than to attack the common enemy.

Moved by these considerations, a stout lady opened the proceedings by
inquiring, with an air of great concern and sympathy, how Mr Quilp was;
whereunto Mr Quilp’s wife’s mother replied sharply, ‘Oh! He was well
enough--nothing much was every the matter with him--and ill weeds were
sure to thrive.’ All the ladies then sighed in concert, shook their
heads gravely, and looked at Mrs Quilp as a martyr.

‘Ah!’ said the spokeswoman, ‘I wish you’d give her a little of your
advice, Mrs Jiniwin’--Mrs Quilp had been a Miss Jiniwin it should be
observed--‘nobody knows better than you, ma’am, what us women owe to
ourselves.’

‘Owe indeed, ma’am!’ replied Mrs Jiniwin. ‘When my poor husband, her
dear father, was alive, if he had ever ventured a cross word to me, I’d
have--’ The good old lady did not finish the sentence, but she twisted
off the head of a shrimp with a vindictiveness which seemed to imply
that the action was in some degree a substitute for words. In this
light it was clearly understood by the other party, who immediately
replied with great approbation, ‘You quite enter into my feelings,
ma’am, and it’s jist what I’d do myself.’

‘But you have no call to do it,’ said Mrs Jiniwin. ‘Luckily for you,
you have no more occasion to do it than I had.’

‘No woman need have, if she was true to herself,’ rejoined the stout
lady.

‘Do you hear that, Betsy?’ said Mrs Jiniwin, in a warning voice.  ‘How
often have I said the same words to you, and almost gone down my knees
when I spoke ‘em!’

Poor Mrs Quilp, who had looked in a state of helplessness from one face
of condolence to another, coloured, smiled, and shook her head
doubtfully. This was the signal for a general clamour, which beginning
in a low murmur gradually swelled into a great noise in which everybody
spoke at once, and all said that she being a young woman had no right
to set up her opinions against the experiences of those who knew so
much better; that it was very wrong of her not to take the advice of
people who had nothing at heart but her good; that it was next door to
being downright ungrateful to conduct herself in that manner; that if
she had no respect for herself she ought to have some for other women,
all of whom she compromised by her meekness; and that if she had no
respect for other women, the time would come when other women would
have no respect for her; and she would be very sorry for that, they
could tell her. Having dealt out these admonitions, the ladies fell to
a more powerful assault than they had yet made upon the  mixed tea, new
bread, fresh butter, shrimps, and watercresses, and said that their
vexation was so great to see her going on like that, that they could
hardly bring themselves to eat a single morsel.

It’s all very fine to talk,’ said Mrs Quilp with much simplicity, ‘but
I know that if I was to die to-morrow, Quilp could marry anybody he
pleased--now that he could, I know!’

There was quite a scream of indignation at this idea. Marry whom he
pleased! They would like to see him dare to think of marrying any of
them; they would like to see the faintest approach to such a thing.
One lady (a widow) was quite certain she should stab him if he hinted
at it.

‘Very well,’ said Mrs Quilp, nodding her head, ‘as I said just now,
it’s very easy to talk, but I say again that I know--that I’m
sure--Quilp has such a way with him when he likes, that the best
looking woman here couldn’t refuse him if I was dead, and she was free,
and he chose to make love to her. Come!’

Everybody bridled up at this remark, as much as to say, ‘I know you
mean me. Let him try--that’s all.’ and yet for some hidden reason they
were all angry with the widow, and each lady whispered in her
neighbour’s ear that it was very plain that said widow thought herself
the person referred to, and what a puss she was!

‘Mother knows,’ said Mrs Quilp, ‘that what I say is quite correct, for
she often said so before we were married. Didn’t you say so, mother?’

This inquiry involved the respected lady in rather a delicate position,
for she certainly had been an active party in making her daughter Mrs
Quilp, and, besides, it was not supporting the family credit to
encourage the idea that she had married a man whom nobody else would
have. On the other hand, to exaggerate the captivating qualities of her
son-in-law would be to weaken the cause of revolt, in which all her
energies were deeply engaged. Beset by these opposing considerations,
Mrs Jiniwin admitted the powers of insinuation, but denied the right to
govern, and with a timely compliment to the stout lady brought back the
discussion to the point from which it had strayed.

‘Oh! It’s a sensible and proper thing indeed, what Mrs George has
said!’ exclaimed the old lady. ‘If women are only true to
themselves!--But Betsy isn’t, and more’s the shame and pity.’

‘Before I’d let a man order me about as Quilp orders her,’ said Mrs
George, ‘before I’d consent to stand in awe of a man as she does of
him, I’d--I’d kill myself, and write a letter first to say he did it!’

This remark being loudly commended and approved of, another lady (from
the Minories) put in her word:

‘Mr Quilp may be a very nice man,’ said this lady, ‘and I supposed
there’s no doubt he is, because Mrs Quilp says he is, and Mrs Jiniwin
says he is, and they ought to know, or nobody does. But still he is not
quite a--what one calls a handsome man, nor quite a young man neither,
which might be a little excuse for him if anything could be; whereas
his wife is young, and is good-looking, and is a woman--which is the
greatest thing after all.’

This last clause being delivered with extraordinary pathos, elicited a
corresponding murmer from the hearers, stimulated by which the lady
went on to remark that if such a husband was cross and unreasonable
with such a wife, then--

‘If he is!’ interposed the mother, putting down her tea-cup and
brushing the crumbs out of her lap, preparatory to making a solemn
declaration. ‘If he is! He is the greatest tyrant that every lived, she
daren’t call her soul her own, he makes her tremble with a word and
even with a look, he frightens her to death, and she hasn’t the spirit
to give him a word back, no, not a single word.’

Notwithstanding that the fact had been notorious beforehand to all the
tea-drinkers, and had been discussed and expatiated on at every
tea-drinking in the neighbourhood for the last twelve months, this
official communication was no sooner made than they all began to talk
at once and to vie with each other in vehemence and volubility.  Mrs
George remarked that people would talk, that people had often said this
to her before, that Mrs Simmons then and there present had told her so
twenty times, that she had always said, ‘No, Henrietta Simmons, unless
I see it with my own eyes and hear it with my own ears, I never will
believe it.’ Mrs Simmons corroborated this testimony and added strong
evidence of her own. The lady from the Minories recounted a successful
course of treatment under which she had placed her own husband, who,
from manifesting one month after marriage unequivocal symptoms of the
tiger, had by this means become subdued into a perfect lamb. Another
lady recounted her own personal struggle and final triumph, in the
course whereof she had found it necessary to call in her mother and two
aunts, and to weep incessantly night and day for six weeks. A third,
who in the general confusion could secure no other listener, fastened
herself upon a young woman still unmarried who happened to be amongst
them, and conjured her, as she valued her own peace of mind and
happiness to profit by this solemn occasion, to take example from the
weakness of Mrs Quilp, and from that time forth to direct her whole
thoughts to taming and subduing the rebellious spirit of man. The noise
was at its height, and half the company had elevated their voices into
a perfect shriek in order to drown the voices of the other half, when
Mrs Jiniwin was seen to change colour and shake her forefinger
stealthily, as if exhorting them to silence. Then, and not until then,
Daniel Quilp himself, the cause and occasion of all this clamour, was
observed to be in the room, looking on and listening with profound
attention.

‘Go on, ladies, go on,’ said Daniel. ‘Mrs Quilp, pray ask the ladies to
stop to supper, and have a couple of lobsters and something light and
palatable.’

‘I--I--didn’t ask them to tea, Quilp,’ stammered his wife. ‘It’s quite
an accident.’

‘So much the better, Mrs Quilp; these accidental parties are always the
pleasantest,’ said the dwarf, rubbing his hands so hard that he seemed
to be engaged in manufacturing, of the dirt with which they were
encrusted, little charges for popguns. ‘What! Not going, ladies, you
are not going, surely!’

His fair enemies tossed their heads slightly as they sought their
respective bonnets and shawls, but left all verbal contention to Mrs
Jiniwin, who finding herself in the position of champion, made a faint
struggle to sustain the character.

‘And why not stop to supper, Quilp,’ said the old lady, ‘if my daughter
had a mind?’

‘To be sure,’ rejoined Daniel. ‘Why not?’

‘There’s nothing dishonest or wrong in a supper, I hope?’ said Mrs
Jiniwin.

‘Surely not,’ returned the dwarf. ‘Why should there be? Nor anything
unwholesome, either, unless there’s lobster-salad or prawns, which I’m
told are not good for digestion.’

‘And you wouldn’t like your wife to be attacked with that, or anything
else that would make her uneasy would you?’ said Mrs Jiniwin.

‘Not for a score of worlds,’ replied the dwarf with a grin. ‘Not even
to have a score of mothers-in-law at the same time--and what a blessing
that would be!’

‘My daughter’s your wife, Mr Quilp, certainly,’ said the old lady with
a giggle, meant for satirical and to imply that he needed to be
reminded of the fact; ‘your wedded wife.’

‘So she is, certainly. So she is,’ observed the dwarf.

‘And she has a right to do as she likes, I hope, Quilp,’ said the
old lady trembling, partly with anger and partly with a secret fear of
her impish son-in-law.

‘Hope she has!’ he replied. ‘Oh! Don’t you know she has? Don’t you know
she has, Mrs Jiniwin?

‘I know she ought to have, Quilp, and would have, if she was of my way
of thinking.’

‘Why an’t you of your mother’s way of thinking, my dear?’ said the
dwarf, turing round and addressing his wife, ‘why don’t you always
imitate your mother, my dear? She’s the ornament of her sex--your
father said so every day of his life. I am sure he did.’

‘Her father was a blessed creetur, Quilp, and worthy twenty thousand of
some people,’ said Mrs Jiniwin; ‘twenty hundred million thousand.’

‘I should like to have known him,’ remarked the dwarf. ‘I dare say he
was a blessed creature then; but I’m sure he is now. It was a happy
release. I believe he had suffered a long time?’

The old lady gave a gasp, but nothing came of it; Quilp resumed, with
the same malice in his eye and the same sarcastic politeness on his
tongue.

‘You look ill, Mrs Jiniwin; I know you have been exciting yourself too
much--talking perhaps, for it is your weakness. Go to bed. Do go to
bed.’

‘I shall go when I please, Quilp, and not before.’

‘But please to do now. Do please to go now,’ said the dwarf.

The old woman looked angrily at him, but retreated as he advanced, and
falling back before him, suffered him to shut the door upon her and
bolt her out among the guests, who were by this time crowding
downstairs. Being left along with his wife, who sat trembling in a
corner with her eyes fixed upon the ground, the little man planted
himself before her, and folding his arms looked steadily at her for a
long time without speaking.

‘Mrs Quilp,’ he said at last.

‘Yes, Quilp,’ she replead meekly.

Instead of pursuing the theme he had in his mind, Quilp folded his arms
again, and looked at her more sternly than before, while she averted
her eyes and kept them on the ground.

‘Mrs Quilp.’

‘Yes, Quilp.’

‘If ever you listen to these beldames again, I’ll bite you.’

With this laconic threat, which he accompanied with a snarl that gave
him the appearance of being particularly in earnest, Mr Quilp bade her
clear the teaboard away, and bring the rum. The spirit being set before
him in a huge case-bottle, which had originally come out of some ship’s
locker, he settled himself in an arm-chair with his large head and face
squeezed up against the back, and his little legs planted on the table.

‘Now, Mrs Quilp,’ he said; ‘I feel in a smoking humour, and shall
probably blaze away all night. But sit where you are, if you please, in
case I want you.’

His wife returned no other reply than the necessary ‘Yes, Quilp,’ and
the small lord of the creation took his first cigar and mixed his first
glass of grog. The sun went down and the stars peeped out, the Tower
turned from its own proper colours to grey and from grey to black, the
room became perfectly dark and the end of the cigar a deep fiery red,
but still Mr Quilp went on smoking and drinking in the same position,
and staring listlessly out of window with the doglike smile always on
his face, save when Mrs Quilp made some involuntary movement of
restlessness or fatigue; and then it expanded into a grin of delight.




CHAPTER 5

Whether Mr Quilp took any sleep by snatches of a few winks at a time,
or whether he sat with his eyes wide open all night long, certain it is
that he kept his cigar alight, and kindled every fresh one from the
ashes of that which was nearly consumed, without requiring the
assistance of a candle. Nor did the striking of the clocks, hour after
hour, appear to inspire him with any sense of drowsiness or any natural
desire to go to rest, but rather to increase his wakefulness, which he
showed, at every such indication of the progress of the night, by a
suppressed cackling in his throat, and a motion of his shoulders, like
one who laughs heartily but the same time slyly and by stealth.

At length the day broke, and poor Mrs Quilp, shivering with cold of
early morning and harassed by fatigue and want of sleep, was discovered
sitting patiently on her chair, raising her eyes at intervals in mute
appeal to the compassion and clemency of her lord, and gently reminding
him by an occasion cough that she was still unpardoned and that her
penance had been of long duration. But her dwarfish spouse still smoked
his cigar and drank his rum without heeding her; and it was not until
the sun had some time risen, and the activity and noise of city day
were rife in the street, that he deigned to recognize her presence by
any word or sign. He might not have done so even then, but for certain
impatient tapping at the door he seemed to denote that some pretty hard
knuckles were actively engaged upon the other side.

‘Why dear me!’ he said looking round with a malicious grin, ‘it’s day.
Open the door, sweet Mrs Quilp!’

His obedient wife withdrew the bolt, and her lady mother entered.

Now, Mrs Jiniwin bounced into the room with great impetuosity; for,
supposing her son-in-law to be still a-bed, she had come to relieve her
feelings by pronouncing a strong opinion upon his general conduct and
character. Seeing that he was up and dressed, and that the room
appeared to have been occupied ever since she quitted it on the
previous evening, she stopped short, in some embarrassment.

Nothing escaped the hawk’s eye of the ugly little man, who, perfectly
understanding what passed in the old lady’s mind, turned uglier still
in the fulness of his satisfaction, and bade her good morning, with a
leer or triumph.

‘Why, Betsy,’ said the old woman, ‘you haven’t been--you don’t mean to
say you’ve been a--’

‘Sitting up all night?’ said Quilp, supplying the conclusion of the
sentence. ‘Yes she has!’

‘All night?’ cried Mrs Jiniwin.

‘Ay, all night. Is the dear old lady deaf?’ said Quilp, with a smile of
which a frown was part. ‘Who says man and wife are bad company?  Ha ha!
The time has flown.’

‘You’re a brute!’ exclaimed Mrs Jiniwin.

‘Come come,’ said Quilp, wilfully misunderstanding her, of course, ‘you
mustn’t call her names. She’s married now, you know. And though she did
beguile the time and keep me from my bed, you must not be so tenderly
careful of me as to be out of humour with her.  Bless you for a dear
old lady. Here’s to your health!’

‘I am much obliged to you,’ returned the old woman, testifying by a
certain restlessness in her hands a vehement desire to shake her
matronly fist at her son-in-law. ‘Oh! I’m very much obliged to you!’

‘Grateful soul!’ cried the dwarf. ‘Mrs Quilp.’

‘Yes, Quilp,’ said the timid sufferer.

‘Help your mother to get breakfast, Mrs Quilp. I am going to the wharf
this morning--the earlier the better, so be quick.’

Mrs Jiniwin made a faint demonstration of rebellion by sitting down in
a chair near the door and folding her arms as if in a resolute
determination to do nothing. But a few whispered words from her
daughter, and a kind inquiry from her son-in-law whether she felt
faint, with a hint that there was abundance of cold water in the next
apartment, routed these symptoms effectually, and she applied herself
to the prescribed preparations with sullen diligence.

While they were in progress, Mr Quilp withdrew to the adjoining room,
and, turning back his coat-collar, proceeded to smear his countenance
with a damp towel of very unwholesome appearance, which made his
complexion rather more cloudy than it was before.  But, while he was
thus engaged, his caution and inquisitiveness did not forsake him, for
with a face as sharp and cunning as ever, he often stopped, even in
this short process, and stood listening for any conversation in the
next room, of which he might be the theme.

‘Ah!’ he said after a short effort of attention, ‘it was not the towel
over my ears, I thought it wasn’t. I’m a little hunchy villain and a
monster, am I, Mrs Jiniwin? Oh!’

The pleasure of this discovery called up the old doglike smile in full
force. When he had quite done with it, he shook himself in a very
doglike manner, and rejoined the ladies.

Mr Quilp now walked up to front of a looking-glass, and was standing
there putting on his neckerchief, when Mrs Jiniwin happening to be
behind him, could not resist the inclination she felt to shake her fist
at her tyrant son-in-law. It was the gesture of an instant, but as she
did so and accompanied the action with a menacing look, she met his eye
in the glass, catching her in the very act. The same glance at the
mirror conveyed to her the reflection of a horribly grotesque and
distorted face with the tongue lolling out; and the next instant the
dwarf, turning about with a perfectly bland and placid look, inquired
in a tone of great affection.

‘How are you now, my dear old darling?’

Slight and ridiculous as the incident was, it made him appear such a
little fiend, and withal such a keen and knowing one, that the old
woman felt too much afraid of him to utter a single word, and suffered
herself to be led with extraordinary politeness to the breakfast-table.
Here he by no means diminished the impression he had just produced, for
he ate hard eggs, shell and all, devoured gigantic prawns with the
heads and tails on, chewed tobacco and water-cresses at the same time
and with extraordinary greediness, drank boiling tea without winking,
bit his fork and spoon till they bent again, and in short performed so
many horrifying and uncommon acts that the women were nearly frightened
out of their wits, and began to doubt if he were really a human
creature. At last, having gone through these proceedings and many
others which were equally a part of his system, Mr Quilp left them,
reduced to a very obedient and humbled state, and betook himself to the
river-side, where he took boat for the wharf on which he had bestowed
his name.

It was flood tide when Daniel Quilp sat himself down in the ferry to
cross to the opposite shore. A fleet of barges were coming lazily on,
some sideways, some head first, some stern first; all in a
wrong-headed, dogged, obstinate way, bumping up against the larger
craft, running under the bows of steamboats, getting into every kind of
nook and corner where they had no business, and being crunched on all
sides like so many walnut-shells; while each with its pair of long
sweeps struggling and splashing in the water looked like some lumbering
fish in pain. In some of the vessels at anchor all hands were busily
engaged in coiling ropes, spreading out sails to dry, taking in or
discharging their cargoes; in others no life was visible but two or
three tarry boys, and perhaps a barking dog running to and fro upon the
deck or scrambling up to look over the side and bark the louder for the
view. Coming slowly on through the forests of masts was a great
steamship, beating the water in short impatient strokes with her heavy
paddles as though she wanted room to breathe, and advancing in her huge
bulk like a sea monster among the minnows of the Thames. On either hand
were long black tiers of colliers; between them vessels slowly working
out of harbour with sails glistening in the sun, and creaking noise on
board, re-echoed from a hundred quarters. The water and all upon it was
in active motion, dancing and buoyant and bubbling up; while the old
grey Tower and piles of building on the shore, with many a church-spire
shooting up between, looked coldly on, and seemed to disdain their
chafing, restless neighbour.

Daniel Quilp, who was not much affected by a bright morning save in so
far as it spared him the trouble of carrying an umbrella, caused
himself to be put ashore hard by the wharf, and proceeded thither
through a narrow lane which, partaking of the amphibious character of
its frequenters, had as much water as mud in its composition, and a
very liberal supply of both. Arrived at his destination, the first
object that presented itself to his view was a pair of very imperfectly
shod feet elevated in the air with the soles upwards, which remarkable
appearance was referable to the boy, who being of an eccentric spirit
and having a natural taste for tumbling, was now standing on his head
and contemplating the aspect of the river under these uncommon
circumstances. He was speedily brought on his heels by the sound of his
master’s voice, and as soon as his head was in its right position, Mr
Quilp, to speak expressively in the absence of a better verb, ‘punched
it’ for him.

‘Come, you let me alone,’ said the boy, parrying Quilp’s hand with both
his elbows alternatively. ‘You’ll get something you won’t like if you
don’t and so I tell you.’

‘You dog,’ snarled Quilp, ‘I’ll beat you with an iron rod, I’ll scratch
you with a rusty nail, I’ll pinch your eyes, if you talk to me--I will.’

With these threats he clenched his hand again, and dexterously diving
in between the elbows and catching the boy’s head as it dodged from
side to side, gave it three or four good hard knocks. Having now
carried his point and insisted on it, he left off.

‘You won’t do it agin,’ said the boy, nodding his head and drawing
back, with the elbows ready in case of the worst; ‘now--’

‘Stand still, you dog,’ said Quilp. ‘I won’t do it again, because I’ve
done it as often as I want. Here. Take the key.’

‘Why don’t you hit one of your size?’ said the boy approaching very
slowly.

‘Where is there one of my size, you dog?’ returned Quilp. ‘Take the
key, or I’ll brain you with it’--indeed he gave him a smart tap with
the handle as he spoke. ‘Now, open the counting-house.’

The boy sulkily complied, muttering at first, but desisting when he
looked round and saw that Quilp was following him with a steady look.
And here it may be remarked, that between this boy and the dwarf there
existed a strange kind of mutual liking. How born or bred, and or
nourished upon blows and threats on one side, and retorts and defiances
on the other, is not to the purpose. Quilp would certainly suffer
nobody to contract him but the boy, and the boy would assuredly not
have submitted to be so knocked about by anybody but Quilp, when he had
the power to run away at any time he chose.

‘Now,’ said Quilp, passing into the wooden counting-house, ‘you mind
the wharf. Stand upon your head agin, and I’ll cut one of your feet
off.’

The boy made no answer, but directly Quilp had shut himself in, stood
on his head before the door, then walked on his hands to the back and
stood on his head there, and then to the opposite side and repeated the
performance. There were indeed four sides to the counting-house, but he
avoided that one where the window was, deeming it probable that Quilp
would be looking out of it. This was prudent, for in point of fact, the
dwarf, knowing his disposition, was lying in wait at a little distance
from the sash armed with a large piece of wood, which, being rough and
jagged and studded in many parts with broken nails, might possibly have
hurt him.

It was a dirty little box, this counting-house, with nothing in it but
an old ricketty desk and two stools, a hat-peg, an ancient almanack, an
inkstand with no ink, and the stump of one pen, and an eight-day clock
which hadn’t gone for eighteen years at least, and of which the
minute-hand had been twisted off for a tooth-pick. Daniel Quilp pulled
his hat over his brows, climbed on to the desk (which had a flat top)
and stretching his short length upon it went to sleep with ease of an
old practitioner; intending, no doubt, to compensate himself for the
deprivation of last night’s rest, by a long and sound nap.

Sound it might have been, but long it was not, for he had not been
asleep a quarter of an hour when the boy opened the door and thrust in
his head, which was like a bundle of badly-picked oakum. Quilp was a
light sleeper and started up directly.

‘Here’s somebody for you,’ said the boy.

‘Who?’

‘I don’t know.’

‘Ask!’ said Quilp, seizing the trifle of wood before mentioned and
throwing it at him with such dexterity that it was well the boy
disappeared before it reached the spot on which he had stood. ‘Ask, you
dog.’

Not caring to venture within range of such missles again, the boy
discreetly sent in his stead the first cause of the interruption, who
now presented herself at the door.

‘What, Nelly!’ cried Quilp.

‘Yes,’ said the child, hesitating whether to enter or retreat, for the
dwarf just roused, with his dishevelled hair hanging all about him and
a yellow handkerchief over his head, was something fearful to behold;
it’s only me, sir.’

‘Come in,’ said Quilp, without getting off the desk. ‘Come in. Stay.
Just look out into the yard, and see whether there’s a boy standing on
his head.’

‘No, sir,’ replied Nell. ‘He’s on his feet.’

‘You’re sure he is?’ said Quilp. ‘Well. Now, come in and shut the door.
What’s your message, Nelly?’

The child handed him a letter. Mr Quilp, without changing his position
further than to turn over a little more on his side and rest his chin
on his hand, proceeded to make himself acquainted with its contents.




CHAPTER 6

Little Nell stood timidly by, with her eyes raised to the countenance
of Mr Quilp as he read the letter, plainly showing by her looks that
while she entertained some fear and distrust of the little man, she was
much inclined to laugh at his uncouth appearance and grotesque
attitude. And yet there was visible on the part of the child a painful
anxiety for his reply, and consciousness of his power to render it
disagreeable or distressing, which was strongly at variance with this
impulse and restrained it more effectually than she could possibly have
done by any efforts of her own.

That Mr Quilp was himself perplexed, and that in no small degree, by
the contents of the letter, was sufficiently obvious. Before he had got
through the first two or three lines he began to open his eyes very
wide and to frown most horribly, the next two or three caused him to
scratch his head in an uncommonly vicious manner, and when he came to
the conclusion he gave a long dismal whistle indicative of surprise and
dismay. After folding and laying it down beside him, he bit the nails
of all of his ten fingers with extreme voracity; and taking it up
sharply, read it again. The second perusal was to all appearance as
unsatisfactory as the first, and plunged him into a profound reverie
from which he awakened to another assault upon his nails and a long
stare at the child, who with her eyes turned towards the ground awaited
his further pleasure.

‘Halloa here!’ he said at length, in a voice, and with a suddenness,
which made the child start as though a gun had been fired off at her
ear. ‘Nelly!’

‘Yes, sir.’

‘Do you know what’s inside this letter, Nell?’

‘No, sir!’

‘Are you sure, quite sure, quite certain, upon your soul?’

‘Quite sure, sir.’

‘Do you wish you may die if you do know, hey?’ said the dwarf.

‘Indeed I don’t know,’ returned the child.

‘Well!’ muttered Quilp as he marked her earnest look. ‘I believe you.
Humph! Gone already? Gone in four-and-twenty hours! What the devil has
he done with it, that’s the mystery!’

This reflection set him scratching his head and biting his nails once
more. While he was thus employed his features gradually relaxed into
what was with him a cheerful smile, but which in any other man would
have been a ghastly grin of pain, and when the child looked up again
she found that he was regarding her with extraordinary favour and
complacency.

‘You look very pretty to-day, Nelly, charmingly pretty. Are you tired,
Nelly?’

‘No, sir. I’m in a hurry to get back, for he will be anxious while I am
away.’

‘There’s no hurry, little Nell, no hurry at all,’ said Quilp. ‘How
should you like to be my number two, Nelly?’

‘To be what, sir?’

‘My number two, Nelly, my second, my Mrs Quilp,’ said the dwarf.

The child looked frightened, but seemed not to understand him, which Mr
Quilp observing, hastened to make his meaning more distinctly.

‘To be Mrs Quilp the second, when Mrs Quilp the first is dead, sweet
Nell,’ said Quilp, wrinkling up his eyes and luring her towards him
with his bent forefinger, ‘to be my wife, my little cherry-cheeked,
red-lipped wife. Say that Mrs Quilp lives five year, or only four,
you’ll be just the proper age for me. Ha ha! Be a good girl, Nelly, a
very good girl, and see if one of these days you don’t come to be Mrs
Quilp of Tower Hill.’

So far from being sustained and stimulated by this delightful prospect,
the child shrank from him in great agitation, and trembled violently.
Mr Quilp, either because frightening anybody afforded him a
constitutional delight, or because it was pleasant to contemplate the
death of Mrs Quilp number one, and the elevation of Mrs Quilp number
two to her post and title, or because he was determined from purposes
of his own to be agreeable and good-humoured at that particular time,
only laughed and feigned to take no heed of her alarm.

‘You shall come with me to Tower Hill and see Mrs Quilp that is,
directly,’ said the dwarf. ‘She’s very fond of you, Nell, though not so
fond as I am. You shall come home with me.’

‘I must go back indeed,’ said the child. ‘He told me to return directly
I had the answer.’

‘But you haven’t it, Nelly,’ retorted the dwarf, ‘and won’t have it,
and can’t have it, until I have been home, so you see that to do your
errand, you must go with me. Reach me yonder hat, my dear, and we’ll go
directly.’ With that, Mr Quilp suffered himself to roll gradually off
the desk until his short legs touched the ground, when he got upon them
and led the way from the counting-house to the wharf outside, when the
first objects that presented themselves were the boy who had stood on
his head and another young gentleman of about his own stature, rolling
in the mud together, locked in a tight embrace, and cuffing each other
with mutual heartiness.

‘It’s Kit!’ cried Nelly, clasping her hand, ‘poor Kit who came with me!
Oh, pray stop them, Mr Quilp!’

‘I’ll stop ‘em,’ cried Quilp, diving into the little counting-house and
returning with a thick stick, ‘I’ll stop ‘em. Now, my boys, fight away.
I’ll fight you both. I’ll take both of you, both together, both
together!’

With which defiances the dwarf flourished his cudgel, and dancing round
the combatants and treading upon them and skipping over them, in a kind
of frenzy, laid about him, now on one and now on the other, in a most
desperate manner, always aiming at their heads and dealing such blows
as none but the veriest little savage would have inflicted. This being
warmer work than they had calculated upon, speedily cooled the courage
of the belligerents, who scrambled to their feet and called for quarter.

‘I’ll beat you to a pulp, you dogs,’ said Quilp, vainly endeavoring to
get near either of them for a parting blow. ‘I’ll bruise you until
you’re copper-coloured, I’ll break your faces till you haven’t a
profile between you, I will.’

‘Come, you drop that stick or it’ll be worse for you,’ said his boy,
dodging round him and watching an opportunity to rush in; ‘you drop
that stick.’

‘Come a little nearer, and I’ll drop it on your skull, you dog,’ said
Quilp, with gleaming eyes; ‘a little nearer--nearer yet.’

But the boy declined the invitation until his master was apparently a
little off his guard, when he darted in and seizing the weapon tried to
wrest it from his grasp. Quilp, who was as strong as a lion, easily
kept his hold until the boy was tugging at it with his utmost power,
when he suddenly let it go and sent him reeling backwards, so that he
fell violently upon his head. The success of this manoeuvre tickled Mr
Quilp beyond description, and he laughed and stamped upon the ground as
at a most irresistible jest.

‘Never mind,’ said the boy, nodding his head and rubbing it at the same
time; ‘you see if ever I offer to strike anybody again because they say
you’re an uglier dwarf than can be seen anywheres for a penny, that’s
all.’

‘Do you mean to say, I’m not, you dog?’ returned Quilp.

‘No!’ retorted the boy.

‘Then what do you fight on my wharf for, you villain?’ said Quilp.

‘Because he said so,’ replied the boy, pointing to Kit, ‘not because you
an’t.’

‘Then why did he say,’ bawled Kit, ‘that Miss Nelly was ugly, and that
she and my master was obliged to do whatever his master liked?  Why did
he say that?’

‘He said what he did because he’s a fool, and you said what you did
because you’re very wise and clever--almost too clever to live, unless
you’re very careful of yourself, Kit.’ said Quilp, with great suavity
in his manner, but still more of quiet malice about his eyes and mouth.
‘Here’s sixpence for you, Kit. Always speak the truth.  At all times,
Kit, speak the truth. Lock the counting-house, you dog, and bring me
the key.’

The other boy, to whom this order was addressed, did as he was told,
and was rewarded for his partizanship in behalf of his master, by a
dexterous rap on the nose with the key, which brought the water into
his eyes. Then Mr Quilp departed with the child and Kit in a boat, and
the boy revenged himself by dancing on his head at intervals on the
extreme verge of the wharf, during the whole time they crossed the
river.

There was only Mrs Quilp at home, and she, little expecting the return
of her lord, was just composing herself for a refreshing slumber when
the sound of his footsteps roused her. She had barely time to seem to
be occupied in some needle-work, when he entered, accompanied by the
child; having left Kit downstairs.

‘Here’s Nelly Trent, dear Mrs Quilp,’ said her husband. ‘A glass of
wine, my dear, and a biscuit, for she has had a long walk. She’ll sit
with you, my soul, while I write a letter.’

Mrs Quilp looked tremblingly in her spouse’s face to know what this
unusual courtesy might portend, and obedient to the summons she saw in
his gesture, followed him into the next room.

‘Mind what I say to you,’ whispered Quilp. ‘See if you can get out of
her anything about her grandfather, or what they do, or how they live,
or what he tells her. I’ve my reasons for knowing, if I can. You women
talk more freely to one another than you do to us, and you have a soft,
mild way with you that’ll win upon her. Do you hear?’

‘Yes, Quilp.’

‘Go then. What’s the matter now?’

‘Dear Quilp,’ faltered his wife. ‘I love the child--if you could do
without making me deceive her--’

The dwarf muttering a terrible oath looked round as if for some weapon
with which to inflict condign punishment upon his disobedient wife. The
submissive little woman hurriedly entreated him not to be angry, and
promised to do as he bade her.

‘Do you hear me,’ whispered Quilp, nipping and pinching her arm; ‘worm
yourself into her secrets; I know you can. I’m listening, recollect. If
you’re not sharp enough, I’ll creak the door, and woe betide you if I
have to creak it much. Go!’

Mrs Quilp departed according to order, and her amiable husband,
ensconcing himself behind the partly opened door, and applying his ear
close to it, began to listen with a face of great craftiness and
attention.

Poor Mrs Quilp was thinking, however, in what manner to begin or what
kind of inquiries she could make; and it was not until the door,
creaking in a very urgent manner, warned her to proceed without further
consideration, that the sound of her voice was heard.

‘How very often you have come backwards and forwards lately to Mr
Quilp, my dear.’

‘I have said so to grandfather, a hundred times,’ returned Nell
innocently.

‘And what has he said to that?’

‘Only sighed, and dropped his head, and seemed so sad and wretched that
if you could have seen him I am sure you must have cried; you could not
have helped it more than I, I know. How that door creaks!’

‘It often does.’ returned Mrs Quilp, with an uneasy glance towards it.
‘But your grandfather--he used not to be so wretched?’

‘Oh, no!’ said the child eagerly, ‘so different! We were once so happy
and he so cheerful and contented! You cannot think what a sad change
has fallen on us since.’

‘I am very, very sorry, to hear you speak like this, my dear!’ said Mrs
Quilp. And she spoke the truth.

‘Thank you,’ returned the child, kissing her cheek, ‘you are always
kind to me, and it is a pleasure to talk to you. I can speak to no one
else about him, but poor Kit. I am very happy still, I ought to feel
happier perhaps than I do, but you cannot think how it grieves me
sometimes to see him alter so.’

‘He’ll alter again, Nelly,’ said Mrs Quilp, ‘and be what he was before.’

‘Oh, if God would only let that come about!’ said the child with
streaming eyes; ‘but it is a long time now, since he first began to--I
thought I saw that door moving!’

‘It’s the wind,’ said Mrs Quilp, faintly. ‘Began to--’

‘To be so thoughtful and dejected, and to forget our old way of
spending the time in the long evenings,’ said the child. ‘I used to
read to him by the fireside, and he sat listening, and when I stopped
and we began to talk, he told me about my mother, and how she once
looked and spoke just like me when she was a little child. Then he used
to take me on his knee, and try to make me understand that she was not
lying in her grave, but had flown to a beautiful country beyond the sky
where nothing died or ever grew old--we were very happy once!’

‘Nelly, Nelly!’ said the poor woman, ‘I can’t bear to see one as young
as you so sorrowful. Pray don’t cry.’

‘I do so very seldom,’ said Nell, ‘but I have kept this to myself a
long time, and I am not quite well, I think, for the tears come into my
eyes and I cannot keep them back. I don’t mind telling you my grief,
for I know you will not tell it to any one again.’

Mrs Quilp turned away her head and made no answer.

‘Then,’ said the child, ‘we often walked in the fields and among the
green trees, and when we came home at night, we liked it better for
being tired, and said what a happy place it was. And if it was dark and
rather dull, we used to say, what did it matter to us, for it only made
us remember our last walk with greater pleasure, and look forward to
our next one. But now we never have these walks, and though it is the
same house it is darker and much more gloomy than it used to be,
indeed!’

She paused here, but though the door creaked more than once, Mrs Quilp
said nothing.

‘Mind you don’t suppose,’ said the child earnestly, ‘that grandfather
is less kind to me than he was. I think he loves me better every day,
and is kinder and more affectionate than he was the day before. You do
not know how fond he is of me!’

‘I am sure he loves you dearly,’ said Mrs Quilp.

‘Indeed, indeed he does!’ cried Nell, ‘as dearly as I love him. But I
have not told you the greatest change of all, and this you must never
breathe again to any one. He has no sleep or rest, but that which he
takes by day in his easy chair; for every night and nearly all night
long he is away from home.’

‘Nelly!’

‘Hush!’ said the child, laying her finger on her lip and looking round.
‘When he comes home in the morning, which is generally just before day,
I let him in. Last night he was very late, and it was quite light. I
saw that his face was deadly pale, that his eyes were bloodshot, and
that his legs trembled as he walked. When I had gone to bed again, I
heard him groan. I got up and ran back to him, and heard him say,
before he knew that I was there, that he could not bear his life much
longer, and if it was not for the child, would wish to die. What shall
I do! Oh! What shall I do!’

The fountains of her heart were opened; the child, overpowered by the
weight of her sorrows and anxieties, by the first confidence she had
ever shown, and the sympathy with which her little tale had been
received, hid her face in the arms of her helpless friend, and burst
into a passion of tears.

In a few minutes Mr Quilp returned, and expressed the utmost surprise
to find her in this condition, which he did very naturally and with
admirable effect, for that kind of acting had been rendered familiar to
him by long practice, and he was quite at home in it.

‘She’s tired you see, Mrs Quilp,’ said the dwarf, squinting in a
hideous manner to imply that his wife was to follow his lead. ‘It’s a
long way from her home to the wharf, and then she was alarmed to see a
couple of young scoundrels fighting, and was timorous on the water
besides. All this together has been too much for her. Poor Nell!’

Mr Quilp unintentionally adopted the very best means he could have
devised for the recovery of his young visitor, by patting her on the
head. Such an application from any other hand might not have produced a
remarkable effect, but the child shrank so quickly from his touch and
felt such an instinctive desire to get out of his reach, that she rose
directly and declared herself ready to return.

‘But you’d better wait, and dine with Mrs Quilp and me.’ said the dwarf.

‘I have been away too long, sir, already,’ returned Nell, drying her
eyes.

‘Well,’ said Mr Quilp, ‘if you will go, you will, Nelly. Here’s the
note. It’s only to say that I shall see him to-morrow or maybe next
day, and that I couldn’t do that little business for him this morning.
Good-bye, Nelly. Here, you sir; take care of her, d’ye hear?’

Kit, who appeared at the summons, deigned to make no reply to so
needless an injunction, and after staring at Quilp in a threatening
manner, as if he doubted whether he might not have been the cause of
Nelly shedding tears, and felt more than half disposed to revenge the
fact upon him on the mere suspicion, turned about and followed his
young mistress, who had by this time taken her leave of Mrs Quilp and
departed.

‘You’re a keen questioner, an’t you, Mrs Quilp?’ said the dwarf,
turning upon her as soon as they were left alone.

‘What more could I do?’ returned his wife mildly.

‘What more could you do!’ sneered Quilp, ‘couldn’t you have done
something less? Couldn’t you have done what you had to do, without
appearing in your favourite part of the crocodile, you minx?’

‘I am very sorry for the child, Quilp,’ said his wife. ‘Surely I’ve
done enough. I’ve led her on to tell her secret she supposed we were
alone; and you were by, God forgive me.’

‘You led her on! You did a great deal truly!’ said Quilp. ‘What did I
tell you about making me creak the door? It’s lucky for you that from
what she let fall, I’ve got the clue I want, for if I hadn’t, I’d have
visited the failure upon you, I can tell you.’

Mrs Quilp being fully persuaded of this, made no reply. Her husband
added with some exultation,

‘But you may thank your fortunate stars--the same stars that made you
Mrs Quilp--you may thank them that I’m upon the old gentleman’s track,
and have got a new light. So let me hear no more about this matter now
or at any other time, and don’t get anything too nice for dinner, for I
shan’t be home to it.’

So saying, Mr Quilp put his hat on and took himself off, and Mrs Quilp,
who was afflicted beyond measure by the recollection of the part she
had just acted, shut herself up in her chamber, and smothering her head
in the bed-clothes bemoaned her fault more bitterly than many less
tender-hearted persons would have mourned a much greater offence; for,
in the majority of cases, conscience is an elastic and very flexible
article, which will bear a deal of stretching and adapt itself to a
great variety of circumstances. Some people by prudent management and
leaving it off piece by piece like a flannel waistcoat in warm weather,
even contrive, in time, to dispense with it altogether; but there be
others who can assume the garment and throw it off at pleasure; and
this, being the greatest and most convenient improvement, is the one
most in vogue.




CHAPTER 7

‘Fred,’ said Mr Swiveller, ‘remember the once popular melody of Begone
dull care; fan the sinking flame of hilarity with the wing of
friendship; and pass the rosy wine.’

Mr Richard Swiveller’s apartments were in the neighbourhood of Drury
Lane, and in addition to this convenience of situation had the
advantage of being over a tobacconist’s shop, so that he was enabled to
procure a refreshing sneeze at any time by merely stepping out upon the
staircase, and was saved the trouble and expense of maintaining a
snuff-box. It was in these apartments that Mr Swiveller made use of the
expressions above recorded for the consolation and encouragement of his
desponding friend; and it may not be uninteresting or improper to
remark that even these brief observations partook in a double sense of
the figurative and poetical character of Mr Swiveller’s mind, as the
rosy wine was in fact represented by one glass of cold gin-and-water,
which was replenished as occasion required from a bottle and jug upon
the table, and was passed from one to another, in a scarcity of
tumblers which, as Mr Swiveller’s was a bachelor’s establishment, may
be acknowledged without a blush. By a like pleasant fiction his single
chamber was always mentioned in a plural number. In its disengaged
times, the tobacconist had announced it in his window as ‘apartments’
for a single gentleman, and Mr Swiveller, following up the hint, never
failed to speak of it as his rooms, his lodgings, or his chambers,
conveying to his hearers a notion of indefinite space, and leaving
their imaginations to wander through long suites of lofty halls, at
pleasure.

In this flight of fancy, Mr Swiveller was assisted by a deceptive piece
of furniture, in reality a bedstead, but in semblance a bookcase, which
occupied a prominent situation in his chamber and seemed to defy
suspicion and challenge inquiry. There is no doubt that by day Mr
Swiveller firmly believed this secret convenience to be a bookcase and
nothing more; that he closed his eyes to the bed, resolutely denied the
existence of the blankets, and spurned the bolster from his thoughts.
No word of its real use, no hint of its nightly service, no allusion to
its peculiar properties, had ever passed between him and his most
intimate friends. Implicit faith in the deception was the first article
of his creed. To be the friend of Swiveller you must reject all
circumstantial evidence, all reason, observation, and experience, and
repose a blind belief in the bookcase. It was his pet weakness, and he
cherished it.

‘Fred!’ said Mr Swiveller, finding that his former adjuration had been
productive of no effect. ‘Pass the rosy.’

Young Trent with an impatient gesture pushed the glass towards him, and
fell again in the moody attitude from which he had been unwillingly
roused.

‘I’ll give you, Fred,’ said his friend, stirring the mixture, ‘a little
sentiment appropriate to the occasion. Here’s May the--’

‘Pshaw!’ interposed the other. ‘You worry me to death with your
chattering. You can be merry under any circumstances.’

‘Why, Mr Trent,’ returned Dick, ‘there is a proverb which talks about
being merry and wise. There are some people who can be merry and can’t
be wise, and some who can be wise (or think they can) and can’t be
merry. I’m one of the first sort. If the proverb’s a good ‘un, I
suppose it’s better to keep to half of it than none; at all events, I’d
rather be merry and not wise, than like you, neither one nor t’other.’

‘Bah!’ muttered his friend, peevishly.

‘With all my heart,’ said Mr Swiveller. ‘In the polite circles I
believe this sort of thing isn’t usually said to a gentleman in his own
apartments, but never mind that. Make yourself at home,’ adding to this
retort an observation to the effect that his friend appeared to be
rather ‘cranky’ in point of temper, Richard Swiveller finished the
rosy and applied himself to the composition of another glassful, in
which, after tasting it with great relish, he proposed a toast to an
imaginary company.

‘Gentlemen, I’ll give you, if you please, Success to the ancient family
of the Swivellers, and good luck to Mr Richard in particular--Mr
Richard, gentlemen,’ said Dick with great emphasis, ‘who spends all his
money on his friends and is Bah!’d for his pains. Hear, hear!’

‘Dick!’ said the other, returning to his seat after having paced the
room twice or thrice, ‘will you talk seriously for two minutes, if I
show you a way to make your fortune with very little trouble?’

‘You’ve shown me so many,’ returned Dick; ‘and nothing has come of any
one of ‘em but empty pockets--’

‘You’ll tell a different story of this one, before a very long time is
over,’ said his companion, drawing his chair to the table. ‘You saw my
sister Nell?’

‘What about her?’ returned Dick.

‘She has a pretty face, has she not?’

‘Why, certainly,’ replied Dick. ‘I must say for her that there’s not
any very strong family likeness between her and you.’

‘Has she a pretty face,’ repeated his friend impatiently.

‘Yes,’ said Dick, ‘she has a pretty face, a very pretty face. What of
that?’

‘I’ll tell you,’ returned his friend. ‘It’s very plain that the old man
and I will remain at daggers drawn to the end of our lives, and that I
have nothing to expect from him. You see that, I suppose?’

‘A bat might see that, with the sun shining,’ said Dick.

‘It’s equally plain that the money which the old flint--rot him--first
taught me to expect that I should share with her at his death, will all
be hers, is it not?’

‘I should said it was,’ replied Dick; ‘unless the way in which I put
the case to him, made an impression. It may have done so. It was
powerful, Fred. ‘Here is a jolly old grandfather’--that was strong, I
thought--very friendly and natural. Did it strike you in that way?’

‘It didn’t strike him,’ returned the other, ‘so we needn’t discuss it.
Now look here. Nell is nearly fourteen.’

‘Fine girl of her age, but small,’ observed Richard Swiveller
parenthetically.

‘If I am to go on, be quiet for one minute,’ returned Trent, fretting
at the slight interest the other appeared to take in the conversation.
‘Now I’m coming to the point.’

‘That’s right,’ said Dick.

‘The girl has strong affections, and brought up as she has been, may,
at her age, be easily influenced and persuaded. If I take her in hand,
I will be bound by a very little coaxing and threatening to bend her to
my will. Not to beat about the bush (for the advantages of the scheme
would take a week to tell) what’s to prevent your marrying her?’

Richard Swiveller, who had been looking over the rim of the tumbler
while his companion addressed the foregoing remarks to him with great
energy and earnestness of manner, no sooner heard these words than he
evinced the utmost consternation, and with difficulty ejaculated the
monosyllable:

‘What!’

‘I say, what’s to prevent,’ repeated the other with a steadiness of
manner, of the effect of which upon his companion he was well assured
by long experience, ‘what’s to prevent your marrying her?’

‘And she “nearly fourteen”!’ cried Dick.

‘I don’t mean marrying her now’--returned the brother angrily; ‘say in
two year’s time, in three, in four. Does the old man look like a
long-liver?’

‘He don’t look like it,’ said Dick shaking his head, ‘but these old
people--there’s no trusting them, Fred. There’s an aunt of mine down in
Dorsetshire that was going to die when I was eight years old, and
hasn’t kept her word yet. They’re so aggravating, so unprincipled, so
spiteful--unless there’s apoplexy in the family, Fred, you can’t
calculate upon ‘em, and even then they deceive you just as often as
not.’

‘Look at the worst side of the question then,’ said Trent as steadily
as before, and keeping his eyes upon his friend. ‘Suppose he lives.’

‘To be sure,’ said Dick. ‘There’s the rub.’

‘I say,’ resumed his friend, ‘suppose he lives, and I persuaded, or if
the word sounds more feasible, forced Nell to a secret marriage with
you. What do you think would come of that?’

‘A family and an annual income of nothing, to keep ‘em on,’ said
Richard Swiveller after some reflection.

‘I tell you,’ returned the other with an increased earnestness, which,
whether it were real or assumed, had the same effect on his companion,
‘that he lives for her, that his whole energies and thoughts are bound
up in her, that he would no more disinherit her for an act of
disobedience than he would take me into his favour again for any act of
obedience or virtue that I could possibly be guilty of. He could not do
it. You or any other man with eyes in his head may see that, if he
chooses.’

‘It seems improbable certainly,’ said Dick, musing.

‘It seems improbable because it is improbable,’ his friend returned.
‘If you would furnish him with an additional inducement to forgive you,
let there be an irreconcilable breach, a most deadly quarrel, between
you and me--let there be a pretense of such a thing, I mean, of
course--and he’ll do fast enough. As to Nell, constant dropping will
wear away a stone; you know you may trust to me as far as she is
concerned. So, whether he lives or dies, what does it come to?  That
you become the sole inheritor of the wealth of this rich old hunks,
that you and I spend it together, and that you get into the bargain a
beautiful young wife.’

‘I suppose there’s no doubt about his being rich’--said Dick.

‘Doubt! Did you hear what he let fall the other day when we were
there? Doubt! What will you doubt next, Dick?’

It would be tedious to pursue the conversation through all its artful
windings, or to develope the gradual approaches by which the heart of
Richard Swiveller was gained. It is sufficient to know that vanity,
interest, poverty, and every spendthrift consideration urged him to
look upon the proposal with favour, and that where all other
inducements were wanting, the habitual carelessness of his disposition
stepped in and still weighed down the scale on the same side. To these
impulses must be added the complete ascendancy which his friend had
long been accustomed to exercise over him--an ascendancy exerted in the
beginning sorely at the expense of his friend’s vices, and was in nine
cases out of ten looked upon as his designing tempter when he was
indeed nothing but his thoughtless, light-headed tool.

The motives on the other side were something deeper than any which
Richard Swiveller entertained or understood, but these being left to
their own development, require no present elucidation. The negotiation
was concluded very pleasantly, and Mr Swiveller was in the act of
stating in flowery terms that he had no insurmountable objection to
marrying anybody plentifully endowed with money or moveables, who could
be induced to take him, when he was interrupted in his observations by
a knock at the door, and the consequent necessity of crying ‘Come in.’

The door was opened, but nothing came in except a soapy arm and a
strong gush of tobacco. The gush of tobacco came from the shop
downstairs, and the soapy arm proceeded from the body of a
servant-girl, who being then and there engaged in cleaning the stairs
had just drawn it out of a warm pail to take in a letter, which letter
she now held in her hand, proclaiming aloud with that quick perception
of surnames peculiar to her class that it was for Mister Snivelling.

Dick looked rather pale and foolish when he glanced at the direction,
and still more so when he came to look at the inside, observing that it
was one of the inconveniences of being a lady’s man, and that it was
very easy to talk as they had been talking, but he had quite forgotten
her.

‘Her. Who?’ demanded Trent.

‘Sophy Wackles,’ said Dick.

‘Who’s she?’

‘She’s all my fancy painted her, sir, that’s what she is,’ said Mr
Swiveller, taking a long pull at ‘the rosy’ and looking gravely at his
friend. ‘She’s lovely, she’s divine. You know her.’

‘I remember,’ said his companion carelessly. ‘What of her?’

‘Why, sir,’ returned Dick, ‘between Miss Sophia Wackles and the humble
individual who has now the honor to address you, warm and tender
sentiments have been engendered, sentiments of the most honourable and
inspiring kind. The Goddess Diana, sir, that calls aloud for the chase,
is not more particular in her behavior than Sophia Wackles; I can tell
you that.’

‘Am I to believe there’s anything real in what you say?’ demanded his
friend; ‘you don’t mean to say that any love-making has been going on?’

‘Love-making, yes. Promising, no,’ said Dick. ‘There can be no action
for breach, that’s one comfort. I’ve never committed myself in writing,
Fred.’

‘And what’s in the letter, pray?’

‘A reminder, Fred, for to-night--a small party of twenty, making two
hundred light fantastic toes in all, supposing every lady and gentleman
to have the proper complement. I must go, if it’s only to begin
breaking off the affair--I’ll do it, don’t you be afraid. I should like
to know whether she left this herself. If she did, unconscious of any
bar to her happiness, it’s affecting, Fred.’

To solve this question, Mr Swiveller summoned the handmaid and
ascertained that Miss Sophy Wackles had indeed left the letter with her
own hands; and that she had come accompanied, for decorum’s sake no
doubt, by a younger Miss Wackles; and that on learning that Mr
Swiveller was at home and being requested to walk upstairs, she was
extremely shocked and professed that she would rather die. Mr Swiveller
heard this account with a degree of admiration not altogether
consistent with the project in which he had just concurred, but his
friend attached very little importance to his behavior in this respect,
probably because he knew that he had influence sufficient to control
Richard Swiveller’s proceedings in this or any other matter, whenever
he deemed it necessary, for the advancement of his own purposes, to
exert it.




CHAPTER 8

Business disposed of, Mr Swiveller was inwardly reminded of its being
nigh dinner-time, and to the intent that his health might not be
endangered by longer abstinence, dispatched a message to the nearest
eating-house requiring an immediate supply of boiled beef and greens
for two. With this demand, however, the eating-house (having experience
of its customer) declined to comply, churlishly sending back for answer
that if Mr Swiveller stood in need of beef perhaps he would be so
obliging as to come there and eat it, bringing with him, as grace
before meat, the amount of a certain small account which had long been
outstanding. Not at all intimidated by this rebuff, but rather
sharpened in wits and appetite, Mr Swiveller forwarded the same message
to another and more distant eating-house, adding to it by way of rider
that the gentleman was induced to send so far, not only by the great
fame and popularity its beef had acquired, but in consequence of the
extreme toughness of the beef retailed at the obdurant cook’s shop,
which rendered it quite unfit not merely for gentlemanly food, but for
any human consumption. The good effect of this politic course was
demonstrated by the speedy arrival of a small pewter pyramid, curiously
constructed of platters and covers, whereof the boiled-beef-plates
formed the base, and a foaming quart-pot the apex; the structure being
resolved into its component parts afforded all things requisite and
necessary for a hearty meal, to which Mr Swiveller and his friend
applied themselves with great keenness and enjoyment.

‘May the present moment,’ said Dick, sticking his fork into a large
carbuncular potato, ‘be the worst of our lives! I like the plan of
sending ‘em with the peel on; there’s a charm in drawing a potato from
its native element (if I may so express it) to which the rich and
powerful are strangers. Ah! “Man wants but little here below, nor wants
that little long!” How true that is!--after dinner.’

‘I hope the eating-house keeper will want but little and that he may
not want that little long,’ returned his companion; but I suspect
you’ve no means of paying for this!’

‘I shall be passing present, and I’ll call,’ said Dick, winking his eye
significantly. ‘The waiter’s quite helpless. The goods are gone, Fred,
and there’s an end of it.’

In point of fact, it would seem that the waiter felt this wholesome
truth, for when he returned for the empty plates and dishes and was
informed by Mr Swiveller with dignified carelessness that he would call
and settle when he should be passing presently, he displayed some
perturbation of spirit and muttered a few remarks about ‘payment on
delivery’ and ‘no trust,’ and other unpleasant subjects, but was fain
to content himself with inquiring at what hour it was likely that the
gentleman would call, in order that being presently responsible for the
beef, greens, and sundries, he might take to be in the way at the time.
Mr Swiveller, after mentally calculating his engagements to a nicety,
replied that he should look in at from two minutes before six and seven
minutes past; and the man disappearing with this feeble consolation,
Richard Swiveller took a greasy memorandum-book from his pocket and
made an entry therein.

‘Is that a reminder, in case you should forget to call?’ said Trent
with a sneer.

‘Not exactly, Fred,’ replied the imperturbable Richard, continuing to
write with a businesslike air. ‘I enter in this little book the names
of the streets that I can’t go down while the shops are open. This
dinner today closes Long Acre. I bought a pair of boots in Great Queen
Street last week, and made that no throughfare too. There’s only one
avenue to the Strand left often now, and I shall have to stop up that
to-night with a pair of gloves. The roads are closing so fast in every
direction, that in a month’s time, unless my aunt sends me a
remittance, I shall have to go three or four miles out of town to get
over the way.’

‘There’s no fear of failing, in the end?’ said Trent.

‘Why, I hope not,’ returned Mr Swiveller, ‘but the average number of
letters it take to soften her is six, and this time we have got as far
as eight without any effect at all. I’ll write another to-morrow
morning. I mean to blot it a good deal and shake some water over it out
of the pepper-castor to make it look penitent. “I’m in such a state of
mind that I hardly know what I write”--blot--“if you could see me at
this minute shedding tears for my past misconduct”--pepper-castor--“my
hand trembles when I think”--blot again--if that don’t produce the
effect, it’s all over.’

By this time, Mr Swiveller had finished his entry, and he now replaced
his pencil in its little sheath and closed the book, in a perfectly
grave and serious frame of mind. His friend discovered that it was time
for him to fulfil some other engagement, and Richard Swiveller was
accordingly left alone, in company with the rosy wine and his own
meditations touching Miss Sophy Wackles.

‘It’s rather sudden,’ said Dick shaking his head with a look of
infinite wisdom, and running on (as he was accustomed to do) with
scraps of verse as if they were only prose in a hurry; ‘when the heart
of a man is depressed with fears, the mist is dispelled when Miss
Wackles appears; she’s a very nice girl. She’s like the red red rose
that’s newly sprung in June--there’s no denying that--she’s also like a
melody that’s sweetly played in tune. It’s really very sudden. Not that
there’s any need, on account of Fred’s little sister, to turn cool
directly, but its better not to go too far. If I begin to cool at all I
must begin at once, I see that. There’s the chance of an action for
breach, that’s another. There’s the chance of--no, there’s no chance of
that, but it’s as well to be on the safe side.’

This undeveloped was the possibility, which Richard Swiveller sought to
conceal even from himself, of his not being proof against the charms of
Miss Wackles, and in some unguarded moment, by linking his fortunes to
hers forever, of putting it out of his own power to further their
notable scheme to which he had so readily become a party. For all these
reasons, he decided to pick a quarrel with Miss Wackles without delay,
and casting about for a pretext determined in favour of groundless
jealousy.  Having made up his mind on this important point, he
circulated the glass (from his right hand to left, and back again)
pretty freely, to enable him to act his part with the greater
discretion, and then, after making some slight improvements in his
toilet, bent his steps towards the spot hallowed by the fair object of
his meditations.

The spot was at Chelsea, for there Miss Sophia Wackles resided with her
widowed mother and two sisters, in conjunction with whom she maintained
a very small day-school for young ladies of proportionate dimensions; a
circumstance which was made known to the neighbourhood by an oval board
over the front first-floor windows, whereupon appeared in circumambient
flourishes the words ‘Ladies’ Seminary’; and which was further
published and proclaimed at intervals between the hours of half-past
nine and ten in the morning, by a straggling and solitary young lady of
tender years standing on the scraper on the tips of her toes and making
futile attempts to reach the knocker with a spelling-book. The several
duties of instruction in this establishment were thus discharged.
English grammar, composition, geography, and the use of the dumb-bells,
by Miss Melissa Wackles; writing, arithmetic, dancing, music, and
general fascination, by Miss Sophia Wackles; the art of needle-work,
marking, and samplery, by Miss Jane Wackles; corporal punishment,
fasting, and other tortures and terrors, by Mrs Wackles. Miss Melissa
Wackles was the eldest daughter, Miss Sophy the next, and Miss Jane the
youngest. Miss Melissa might have seen five-and-thirty summers or
thereabouts, and verged on the autumnal; Miss Sophy was a fresh, good
humoured, buxom girl of twenty; and Miss Jane numbered scarcely sixteen
years. Mrs Wackles was an excellent but rather venomous old lady of
three-score.

To this Ladies’ Seminary, then, Richard Swiveller hied, with designs
obnoxious to the peace of the fair Sophia, who, arrayed in virgin
white, embellished by no ornament but one blushing rose, received him
on his arrival, in the midst of very elegant not to say brilliant
preparations; such as the embellishment of the room with the little
flower-pots which always stood on the window-sill outside, save in
windy weather when they blew into the area; the choice attire of the
day-scholars who were allowed to grace the festival; the unwonted curls
of Miss Jane Wackles who had kept her head during the whole of the
preceding day screwed up tight in a yellow play-bill; and the solemn
gentility and stately bearing of the old lady and her eldest daughter,
which struck Mr Swiveller as being uncommon but made no further
impression upon him.

The truth is--and, as there is no accounting for tastes, even a taste
so strange as this may be recorded without being looked upon as a
wilful and malicious invention--the truth is that neither Mrs Wackles
nor her eldest daughter had at any time greatly favoured the
pretensions of Mr Swiveller, being accustomed to make slight mention of
him as ‘a gay young man’ and to sigh and shake their heads ominously
whenever his name was mentioned. Mr Swiveller’s conduct in respect to
Miss Sophy having been of that vague and dilatory kind which is usually
looked upon as betokening no fixed matrimonial intentions, the young
lady herself began in course of time to deem it highly desirable, that
it should be brought to an issue one way or other. Hence she had at
last consented to play off against Richard Swiveller a stricken
market-gardner known to be ready with his offer on the smallest
encouragement, and hence--as this occasion had been specially assigned
for the purpose--that great anxiety on her part for Richard Swiveller’s
presence which had occasioned her to leave the note he has been seen to
receive. ‘If he has any expectations at all or any means of keeping a
wife well,’ said Mrs Wackles to her eldest daughter, ‘he’ll state ‘em
to us now or never.’--‘If he really cares about me,’ thought Miss
Sophy, ‘he must tell me so, to-night.’

But all these sayings and doings and thinkings being unknown to Mr
Swiveller, affected him not in the least; he was debating in his mind
how he could best turn jealous, and wishing that Sophy were for that
occasion only far less pretty than she was, or that she were her own
sister, which would have served his turn as well, when the company
came, and among them the market-gardener, whose name was Cheggs. But Mr
Cheggs came not alone or unsupported, for he prudently brought along
with him his sister, Miss Cheggs, who making straight to Miss Sophy and
taking her by both hands, and kissing her on both cheeks, hoped in an
audible whisper that they had not come too early.

‘Too early, no!’ replied Miss Sophy.

‘Oh, my dear,’ rejoined Miss Cheggs in the same whisper as before,
‘I’ve been so tormented, so worried, that it’s a mercy we were not here
at four o’clock in the afternoon. Alick has been in such a state of
impatience to come! You’d hardly believe that he was dressed before
dinner-time and has been looking at the clock and teasing me ever
since. It’s all your fault, you naughty thing.’

Hereupon Miss Sophy blushed, and Mr Cheggs (who was bashful before
ladies) blushed too, and Miss Sophy’s mother and sisters, to prevent Mr
Cheggs from blushing more, lavished civilities and attentions upon him,
and left Richard Swiveller to take care of himself. Here was the very
thing he wanted, here was good cause reason and foundation for
pretending to be angry; but having this cause reason and foundation
which he had come expressly to seek, not expecting to find, Richard
Swiveller was angry in sound earnest, and wondered what the devil
Cheggs meant by his impudence.

However, Mr Swiveller had Miss Sophy’s hand for the first quadrille
(country-dances being low, were utterly proscribed) and so gained an
advantage over his rival, who sat despondingly in a corner and
contemplated the glorious figure of the young lady as she moved through
the mazy dance. Nor was this the only start Mr Swiveller had of the
market-gardener, for determining to show the family what quality of man
they trifled with, and influenced perhaps by his late libations, he
performed such feats of agility and such spins and twirls as filled the
company with astonishment, and in particular caused a very long
gentleman who was dancing with a very short scholar, to stand quite
transfixed by wonder and admiration. Even Mrs Wackles forgot for the
moment to snub three small young ladies who were inclined to be happy,
and could not repress a rising thought that to have such a dancer as
that in the family would be a pride indeed.

At this momentous crisis, Miss Cheggs proved herself a vigourous and
useful ally, for not confining herself to expressing by scornful smiles
a contempt for Mr Swiveller’s accomplishments, she took every
opportunity of whispering into Miss Sophy’s ear expressions of
condolence and sympathy on her being worried by such a ridiculous
creature, declaring that she was frightened to death lest Alick should
fall upon, and beat him, in the fulness of his wrath, and entreating
Miss Sophy to observe how the eyes of the said Alick gleamed with love
and fury; passions, it may be observed, which being too much for his
eyes rushed into his nose also, and suffused it with a crimson glow.

‘You must dance with Miss Cheggs,’ said Miss Sophy to Dick Swiviller,
after she had herself danced twice with Mr Cheggs and made great show
of encouraging his advances. ‘She’s a nice girl--and her brother’s
quite delightful.’

‘Quite delightful, is he?’ muttered Dick. ‘Quite delighted too, I
should say, from the manner in which he’s looking this way.’

Here Miss Jane (previously instructed for the purpose) interposed her
many curls and whispered her sister to observe how jealous Mr Cheggs
was.

‘Jealous! Like his impudence!’ said Richard Swiviller.

‘His impudence, Mr Swiviller!’ said Miss Jane, tossing her head.  ‘Take
care he don’t hear you, sir, or you may be sorry for it.’

‘Oh, pray, Jane--’ said Miss Sophy.

‘Nonsense!’ replied her sister. ‘Why shouldn’t Mr Cheggs be jealous if
he likes? I like that, certainly. Mr Cheggs has a good a right to be
jealous as anyone else has, and perhaps he may have a better right soon
if he hasn’t already. You know best about that, Sophy!’

Though this was a concerted plot between Miss Sophy and her sister,
originating in humane intentions and having for its object the inducing
Mr Swiviller to declare himself in time, it failed in its effect; for
Miss Jane being one of those young ladies who are prematurely shrill
and shrewish, gave such undue importance to her part that Mr Swiviller
retired in dudgeon, resigning his mistress to Mr Cheggs and conveying a
defiance into his looks which that gentleman indignantly returned.

‘Did you speak to me, sir?’ said Mr Cheggs, following him into a
corner. ‘Have the kindness to smile, sir, in order that we may not be
suspected. Did you speak to me, sir’?

Mr Swiviller looked with a supercilious smile at Mr Chegg’s toes, then
raised his eyes from them to his ankles, from that to his shin, from
that to his knee, and so on very gradually, keeping up his right leg,
until he reached his waistcoat, when he raised his eyes from button to
button until he reached his chin, and travelling straight up the middle
of his nose came at last to his eyes, when he said abruptly,

‘No, sir, I didn’t.’

‘’Hem!’ said Mr Cheggs, glancing over his shoulder, ‘have the goodness
to smile again, sir. Perhaps you wished to speak to me, sir.’

‘No, sir, I didn’t do that, either.’

‘Perhaps you may have nothing to say to me now, sir,’ said Mr Cheggs
fiercely.

At these words Richard Swiviller withdrew his eyes from Mr Chegg’s
face, and travelling down the middle of his nose and down his waistcoat
and down his right leg, reached his toes again, and carefully surveyed
him; this done, he crossed over, and coming up the other leg, and
thence approaching by the waistcoat as before, said when had got to his
eyes, ‘No sir, I haven’t.’

‘Oh, indeed, sir!’ said Mr Cheggs. ‘I’m glad to hear it. You know where
I’m to be found, I suppose, sir, in case you should have anything to
say to me?’

‘I can easily inquire, sir, when I want to know.’

‘There’s nothing more we need say, I believe, sir?’

‘Nothing more, sir’--With that they closed the tremendous dialog by
frowning mutually. Mr Cheggs hastened to tender his hand to Miss Sophy,
and Mr Swiviller sat himself down in a corner in a very moody state.

Hard by this corner, Mrs Wackles and Miss Wackles were seated, looking
on at the dance; and unto Mrs and Miss Wackles, Miss Cheggs
occasionally darted when her partner was occupied with his share of the
figure, and made some remark or other which was gall and wormwood to
Richard Swiviller’s soul. Looking into the eyes of Mrs and Miss Wackles
for encouragement, and sitting very upright and uncomfortable on a
couple of hard stools, were two of the day-scholars; and when Miss
Wackles smiled, and Mrs Wackles smiled, the two little girls on the
stools sought to curry favour by smiling likewise, in gracious
acknowledgement of which attention the old lady frowned them down
instantly, and said that if they dared to be guilty of such an
impertinence again, they should be sent under convoy to their
respective homes. This threat caused one of the young ladies, she being
of a weak and trembling temperament, to shed tears, and for this
offense they were both filed off immediately, with a dreadful
promptitude that struck terror into the souls of all the pupils.

‘I’ve got such news for you,’ said Miss Cheggs approaching once more,
‘Alick has been saying such things to Sophy. Upon my word, you know,
it’s quite serious and in earnest, that’s clear.’

‘What’s he been saying, my dear?’ demanded Mrs Wackles.

‘All manner of things,’ replied Miss Cheggs, ‘you can’t think how out
he has been speaking!’

Richard Swiviller considered it advisable to hear no more, but taking
advantage of a pause in the dancing, and the approach of Mr Cheggs to
pay his court to the old lady, swaggered with an extremely careful
assumption of extreme carelessness toward the door, passing on the way
Miss Jane Wackles, who in all the glory of her curls was holding a
flirtation, (as good practice when no better was to be had) with a
feeble old gentleman who lodged in the parlour. Near the door sat Miss
Sophy, still fluttered and confused by the attentions of Mr Cheggs, and
by her side Richard Swiveller lingered for a moment to exchange a few
parting words.

‘My boat is on the shore and my bark is on the sea, but before I pass
this door I will say farewell to thee,’ murmured Dick, looking gloomily
upon her.

‘Are you going?’ said Miss Sophy, whose heart sank within her at the
result of her stratagem, but who affected a light indifference
notwithstanding.

‘Am I going!’ echoed Dick bitterly. ‘Yes, I am. What then?’

‘Nothing, except that it’s very early,’ said Miss Sophy; ‘but you are
your own master, of course.’

‘I would that I had been my own mistress too,’ said Dick, ‘before I had
ever entertained a thought of you. Miss Wackles, I believed you true,
and I was blest in so believing, but now I mourn that e’er I knew, a
girl so fair yet so deceiving.’

Miss Sophy bit her lip and affected to look with great interest after
Mr Cheggs, who was quaffing lemonade in the distance.

‘I came here,’ said Dick, rather oblivious of the purpose with which he
had really come, ‘with my bosom expanded, my heart dilated, and my
sentiments of a corresponding description. I go away with feelings that
may be conceived but cannot be described, feeling within myself that
desolating truth that my best affections have experienced this night a
stifler!’

‘I am sure I don’t know what you mean, Mr Swiviller,’ said Miss Sophy
with downcast eyes. ‘I’m very sorry if--’

‘Sorry, Ma’am!’ said Dick, ‘sorry in the possession of a Cheggs! But I
wish you a very good night, concluding with this slight remark, that
there is a young lady growing up at this present moment for me, who has
not only great personal attractions but great wealth, and who has
requested her next of kin to propose for my hand, which, having a
regard for some members of her family, I have consented to promise.
It’s a gratifying circumstance which you’ll be glad to hear, that a
young and lovely girl is growing into a woman expressly on my account,
and is now saving up for me. I thought I’d mention it. I have now
merely to apologize for trespassing so long upon your attention. Good
night.’

‘There’s one good thing springs out of all this,’ said Richard
Swiviller to himself when he had reached home and was hanging over the
candle with the extinguisher in his hand, ‘which is, that I now go
heart and soul, neck and heels, with Fred in all his scheme about
little Nelly, and right glad he’ll be to find me so strong upon it. He
shall know all about that to-morrow, and in the meantime, as it’s
rather late, I’ll try and get a wink of the balmy.’

‘The balmy’ came almost as soon as it was courted. In a very few
minutes Mr Swiviller was fast asleep, dreaming that he had married
Nelly Trent and come into the property, and that his first act of power
was to lay waste the market-garden of Mr Cheggs and turn it into a
brick-field.




CHAPTER 9

The child, in her confidence with Mrs Quilp, had but feebly described
the sadness and sorrow of her thoughts, or the heaviness of the cloud
which overhung her home, and cast dark shadows on its hearth.  Besides
that it was very difficult to impart to any person not intimately
acquainted with the life she led, an adequate sense of its gloom and
loneliness, a constant fear of in some way committing or injuring the
old man to whom she was so tenderly attached, had restrained her, even
in the midst of her heart’s overflowing, and made her timid of allusion
to the main cause of her anxiety and distress.

For, it was not the monotonous days unchequered by variety and
uncheered by pleasant companionship, it was not the dark dreary
evenings or the long solitary nights, it was not the absence of every
slight and easy pleasure for which young hearts beat high, or the
knowing nothing of childhood but its weakness and its easily wounded
spirit, that had wrung such tears from Nell.  To see the old man struck
down beneath the pressure of some hidden grief, to mark his wavering
and unsettled state, to be agitated at times with a dreadful fear that
his mind was wandering, and to trace in his words and looks the dawning
of despondent madness; to watch and wait and listen for confirmation of
these things day after day, and to feel and know that, come what might,
they were alone in the world with no one to help or advise or care
about them--these were causes of depression and anxiety that might have
sat heavily on an older breast with many influences at work to cheer
and gladden it, but how heavily on the mind of a young child to whom
they were ever present, and who was constantly surrounded by all that
could keep such thoughts in restless action!

And yet, to the old man’s vision, Nell was still the same.  When he
could, for a moment, disengage his mind from the phantom that haunted
and brooded on it always, there was his young companion with the same
smile for him, the same earnest words, the same merry laugh, the same
love and care that, sinking deep into his soul, seemed to have been
present to him through his whole life.  And so he went on, content to
read the book of her heart from the page first presented to him, little
dreaming of the story that lay hidden in its other leaves, and
murmuring within himself that at least the child was happy.

She had been once.  She had gone singing through the dim rooms, and
moving with gay and lightsome step among their dusty treasures, making
them older by her young life, and sterner and more grim by her gay and
cheerful presence.  But, now, the chambers were cold and gloomy, and
when she left her own little room to while away the tedious hours, and
sat in one of them, she was still and motionless as their inanimate
occupants, and had no heart to startle the echoes--hoarse from their
long silence--with her voice.

In one of these rooms, was a window looking into the street, where the
child sat, many and many a long evening, and often far into the night,
alone and thoughtful.  None are so anxious as those who watch and wait;
at these times, mournful fancies came flocking on her mind, in crowds.

She would take her station here, at dusk, and watch the people as they
passed up and down the street, or appeared at the windows of the
opposite houses; wondering whether those rooms were as lonesome as that
in which she sat, and whether those people felt it company to see her
sitting there, as she did only to see them look out and draw in their
heads again.  There was a crooked stack of chimneys on one of the
roofs, in which, by often looking at them, she had fancied ugly faces
that were frowning over at her and trying to peer into the room; and
she felt glad when it grew too dark to make them out, though she was
sorry too, when the man came to light the lamps in the street--for it
made it late, and very dull inside.  Then, she would draw in her head
to look round the room and see that everything was in its place and
hadn’t moved; and looking out into the street again, would perhaps see
a man passing with a coffin on his back, and two or three others
silently following him to a house where somebody lay dead; which made
her shudder and think of such things until they suggested afresh the
old man’s altered face and manner, and a new train of fears and
speculations.  If he were to die--if sudden illness had happened to
him, and he were never to come home again, alive--if, one night, he
should come home, and kiss and bless her as usual, and after she had
gone to bed and had fallen asleep and was perhaps dreaming pleasantly,
and smiling in her sleep, he should kill himself and his blood come
creeping, creeping, on the ground to her own bed-room door!  These
thoughts were too terrible to dwell upon, and again she would have
recourse to the street, now trodden by fewer feet, and darker and more
silent than before.  The shops were closing fast, and lights began to
shine from the upper windows, as the neighbours went to bed.  By
degrees, these dwindled away and disappeared or were replaced, here and
there, by a feeble rush-candle which was to burn all night.  Still,
there was one late shop at no great distance which sent forth a ruddy
glare upon the pavement even yet, and looked bright and companionable.
But, in a little time, this closed, the light was extinguished, and all
was gloomy and quiet, except when some stray footsteps sounded on the
pavement, or a neighbour, out later than his wont, knocked lustily at
his house-door to rouse the sleeping inmates.

When the night had worn away thus far (and seldom now until it had) the
child would close the window, and steal softly down stairs, thinking as
she went that if one of those hideous faces below, which often mingled
with her dreams, were to meet her by the way, rendering itself visible
by some strange light of its own, how terrified she would be.  But
these fears vanished before a well-trimmed lamp and the familiar aspect
of her own room.  After praying fervently, and with many bursting
tears, for the old man, and the restoration of his peace of mind and
the happiness they had once enjoyed, she would lay her head upon the
pillow and sob herself to sleep: often starting up again, before the
day-light came, to listen for the bell and respond to the imaginary
summons which had roused her from her slumber.

One night, the third after Nelly’s interview with Mrs Quilp, the old
man, who had been weak and ill all day, said he should not leave home.
The child’s eyes sparkled at the intelligence, but her joy subsided
when they reverted to his worn and sickly face.

‘Two days,’ he said, ‘two whole, clear, days have passed, and there is
no reply.  What did he tell thee, Nell?’

‘Exactly what I told you, dear grandfather, indeed.’

‘True,’ said the old man, faintly.  ‘Yes.  But tell me again, Nell.  My
head fails me.  What was it that he told thee?  Nothing more than that
he would see me to-morrow or next day?  That was in the note.’

‘Nothing more,’ said the child.  ‘Shall I go to him again to-morrow,
dear grandfather?  Very early?  I will be there and back, before
breakfast.’

The old man shook his head, and sighing mournfully, drew her towards
him.

‘’Twould be of no use, my dear, no earthly use.  But if he deserts me,
Nell, at this moment--if he deserts me now, when I should, with his
assistance, be recompensed for all the time and money I have lost, and
all the agony of mind I have undergone, which makes me what you see, I
am ruined, and--worse, far worse than that--have ruined thee, for whom
I ventured all.  If we are beggars--!’

‘What if we are?’ said the child boldly.  ‘Let us be beggars, and be
happy.’

‘Beggars--and happy!’ said the old man.  ‘Poor child!’

‘Dear grandfather,’ cried the girl with an energy which shone in her
flushed face, trembling voice, and impassioned gesture, ‘I am not a
child in that I think, but even if I am, oh hear me pray that we may
beg, or work in open roads or fields, to earn a scanty living, rather
than live as we do now.’

‘Nelly!’ said the old man.

‘Yes, yes, rather than live as we do now,’ the child repeated, more
earnestly than before.  ‘If you are sorrowful, let me know why and be
sorrowful too; if you waste away and are paler and weaker every day,
let me be your nurse and try to comfort you.  If you are poor, let us
be poor together; but let me be with you, do let me be with you; do not
let me see such change and not know why, or I shall break my heart and
die.  Dear grandfather, let us leave this sad place to-morrow, and beg
our way from door to door.’

The old man covered his face with his hands, and hid it in the pillow
of the couch on which he lay.

‘Let us be beggars,’ said the child passing an arm round his neck, ‘I
have no fear but we shall have enough, I am sure we shall.  Let us walk
through country places, and sleep in fields and under trees, and never
think of money again, or anything that can make you sad, but rest at
nights, and have the sun and wind upon our faces in the day, and thank
God together!  Let us never set foot in dark rooms or melancholy
houses, any more, but wander up and down wherever we like to go; and
when you are tired, you shall stop to rest in the pleasantest place
that we can find, and I will go and beg for both.’

The child’s voice was lost in sobs as she dropped upon the old man’s
neck; nor did she weep alone.

These were not words for other ears, nor was it a scene for other eyes.
And yet other ears and eyes were there and greedily taking in all that
passed, and moreover they were the ears and eyes of no less a person
than Mr Daniel Quilp, who, having entered unseen when the child first
placed herself at the old man’s side, refrained--actuated, no doubt, by
motives of the purest delicacy--from interrupting the conversation, and
stood looking on with his accustomed grin.  Standing, however, being a
tiresome attitude to a gentleman already fatigued with walking, and the
dwarf being one of that kind of persons who usually make themselves at
home, he soon cast his eyes upon a chair, into which he skipped with
uncommon agility, and perching himself on the back with his feet upon
the seat, was thus enabled to look on and listen with greater comfort
to himself, besides gratifying at the same time that taste for doing
something fantastic and monkey-like, which on all occasions had strong
possession of him.  Here, then, he sat, one leg cocked carelessly over
the other, his chin resting on the palm of his hand, his head turned a
little on one side, and his ugly features twisted into a complacent
grimace.  And in this position the old man, happening in course of time
to look that way, at length chanced to see him: to his unbounded
astonishment.

The child uttered a suppressed shriek on beholding this agreeable
figure; in their first surprise both she and the old man, not knowing
what to say, and half doubting its reality, looked shrinkingly at it.
Not at all disconcerted by this reception, Daniel Quilp preserved the
same attitude, merely nodding twice or thrice with great condescension.
At length, the old man pronounced his name, and inquired how he came
there.

‘Through the door,’ said Quilp pointing over his shoulder with his
thumb.  ‘I’m not quite small enough to get through key-holes.  I wish I
was.  I want to have some talk with you, particularly, and in private.
With nobody present, neighbour.  Good-bye, little Nelly.’

Nell looked at the old man, who nodded to her to retire, and kissed her
cheek.

‘Ah!’ said the dwarf, smacking his lips, ‘what a nice kiss that
was--just upon the rosy part.  What a capital kiss!’

Nell was none the slower in going away, for this remark.  Quilp looked
after her with an admiring leer, and when she had closed the door, fell
to complimenting the old man upon her charms.

‘Such a fresh, blooming, modest little bud, neighbour,’ said Quilp,
nursing his short leg, and making his eyes twinkle very much; ‘such a
chubby, rosy, cosy, little Nell!’

The old man answered by a forced smile, and was plainly struggling with
a feeling of the keenest and most exquisite impatience.  It was not
lost upon Quilp, who delighted in torturing him, or indeed anybody
else, when he could.

‘She’s so,’ said Quilp, speaking very slowly, and feigning to be quite
absorbed in the subject, ‘so small, so compact, so beautifully
modelled, so fair, with such blue veins and such a transparent skin,
and such little feet, and such winning ways--but bless me, you’re
nervous!  Why neighbour, what’s the matter?  I swear to you,’ continued
the dwarf dismounting from the chair and sitting down in it, with a
careful slowness of gesture very different from the rapidity with which
he had sprung up unheard, ‘I swear to you that I had no idea old blood
ran so fast or kept so warm.  I thought it was sluggish in its course,
and cool, quite cool.  I am pretty sure it ought to be.  Yours must be
out of order, neighbour.’

‘I believe it is,’ groaned the old man, clasping his head with both
hands.  ‘There’s burning fever here, and something now and then to
which I fear to give a name.’

The dwarf said never a word, but watched his companion as he paced
restlessly up and down the room, and presently returned to his seat.
Here he remained, with his head bowed upon his breast for some time,
and then suddenly raising it, said,

‘Once, and once for all, have you brought me any money?’

‘No!’ returned Quilp.

‘Then,’ said the old man, clenching his hands desperately, and looking
upwards, ‘the child and I are lost!’

‘Neighbour,’ said Quilp glancing sternly at him, and beating his hand
twice or thrice upon the table to attract his wandering attention, ‘let
me be plain with you, and play a fairer game than when you held all the
cards, and I saw but the backs and nothing more.  You have no secret
from me now.’

The old man looked up, trembling.

‘You are surprised,’ said Quilp.  ‘Well, perhaps that’s natural.  You
have no secret from me now, I say; no, not one.  For now, I know, that
all those sums of money, that all those loans, advances, and supplies
that you have had from me, have found their way to--shall I say the
word?’

‘Aye!’ replied the old man, ‘say it, if you will.’

‘To the gaming-table,’ rejoined Quilp, ‘your nightly haunt.  This was
the precious scheme to make your fortune, was it; this was the secret
certain source of wealth in which I was to have sunk my money (if I had
been the fool you took me for); this was your inexhaustible mine of
gold, your El Dorado, eh?’

‘Yes,’ cried the old man, turning upon him with gleaming eyes, ‘it was.
It is.  It will be, till I die.’

‘That I should have been blinded,’ said Quilp looking contemptuously at
him, ‘by a mere shallow gambler!’

‘I am no gambler,’ cried the old man fiercely.  ‘I call Heaven to
witness that I never played for gain of mine, or love of play; that at
every piece I staked, I whispered to myself that orphan’s name and
called on Heaven to bless the venture;--which it never did.  Whom did
it prosper?  Who were those with whom I played?  Men who lived by
plunder, profligacy, and riot; squandering their gold in doing ill, and
propagating vice and evil.  My winnings would have been from them, my
winnings would have been bestowed to the last farthing on a young
sinless child whose life they would have sweetened and made happy.
What would they have contracted?  The means of corruption,
wretchedness, and misery.  Who would not have hoped in such a cause?
Tell me that!  Who would not have hoped as I did?’

‘When did you first begin this mad career?’ asked Quilp, his taunting
inclination subdued, for a moment, by the old man’s grief and wildness.

‘When did I first begin?’ he rejoined, passing his hand across his
brow.  ‘When was it, that I first began?  When should it be, but when I
began to think how little I had saved, how long a time it took to save
at all, how short a time I might have at my age to live, and how she
would be left to the rough mercies of the world, with barely enough to
keep her from the sorrows that wait on poverty; then it was that I
began to think about it.’

‘After you first came to me to get your precious grandson packed off to
sea?’ said Quilp.

‘Shortly after that,’ replied the old man.  ‘I thought of it a long
time, and had it in my sleep for months.  Then I began.  I found no
pleasure in it, I expected none.  What has it ever brought me but
anxious days and sleepless nights; but loss of health and peace of
mind, and gain of feebleness and sorrow!’

‘You lost what money you had laid by, first, and then came to me.
While I thought you were making your fortune (as you said you were) you
were making yourself a beggar, eh?  Dear me!  And so it comes to pass
that I hold every security you could scrape together, and a bill of
sale upon the--upon the stock and property,’ said Quilp standing up and
looking about him, as if to assure himself that none of it had been
taken away.  ‘But did you never win?’

‘Never!’ groaned the old man.  ‘Never won back my loss!’

‘I thought,’ sneered the dwarf, ‘that if a man played long enough he
was sure to win at last, or, at the worst, not to come off a loser.’

‘And so he is,’ cried the old man, suddenly rousing himself from his
state of despondency, and lashed into the most violent excitement, ‘so
he is; I have felt that from the first, I have always known it, I’ve
seen it, I never felt it half so strongly as I feel it now.  Quilp, I
have dreamed, three nights, of winning the same large sum, I never
could dream that dream before, though I have often tried.  Do not
desert me, now I have this chance.  I have no resource but you, give me
some help, let me try this one last hope.’

The dwarf shrugged his shoulders and shook his head.

‘See, Quilp, good tender-hearted Quilp,’ said the old man, drawing some
scraps of paper from his pocket with a trembling hand, and clasping the
dwarf’s arm, ‘only see here.  Look at these figures, the result of long
calculation, and painful and hard experience.  I MUST win.  I only want
a little help once more, a few pounds, but two score pounds, dear
Quilp.’

‘The last advance was seventy,’ said the dwarf; ‘and it went in one
night.’

‘I know it did,’ answered the old man, ‘but that was the very worst
fortune of all, and the time had not come then.  Quilp, consider,
consider,’ the old man cried, trembling so much the while, that the
papers in his hand fluttered as if they were shaken by the wind, ‘that
orphan child!  If I were alone, I could die with gladness--perhaps even
anticipate that doom which is dealt out so unequally: coming, as it
does, on the proud and happy in their strength, and shunning the needy
and afflicted, and all who court it in their despair--but what I have
done, has been for her.  Help me for her sake I implore you; not for
mine; for hers!’

‘I’m sorry I’ve got an appointment in the city,’ said Quilp, looking at
his watch with perfect self-possession, ‘or I should have been very
glad to have spent half an hour with you while you composed yourself,
very glad.’

‘Nay, Quilp, good Quilp,’ gasped the old man, catching at his skirts,
‘you and I have talked together, more than once, of her poor mother’s
story.  The fear of her coming to poverty has perhaps been bred in me
by that.  Do not be hard upon me, but take that into account.  You are
a great gainer by me.  Oh spare me the money for this one last hope!’

‘I couldn’t do it really,’ said Quilp with unusual politeness, ‘though
I tell you what--and this is a circumstance worth bearing in mind as
showing how the sharpest among us may be taken in sometimes--I was so
deceived by the penurious way in which you lived, alone with Nelly--’

‘All done to save money for tempting fortune, and to make her triumph
greater,’ cried the old man.

‘Yes, yes, I understand that now,’ said Quilp; ‘but I was going to say,
I was so deceived by that, your miserly way, the reputation you had
among those who knew you of being rich, and your repeated assurances
that you would make of my advances treble and quadruple the interest
you paid me, that I’d have advanced you, even now, what you want, on
your simple note of hand, if I hadn’t unexpectedly become acquainted
with your secret way of life.’

‘Who is it,’ retorted the old man desperately, ‘that, notwithstanding
all my caution, told you?  Come.  Let me know the name--the person.’

The crafty dwarf, bethinking himself that his giving up the child would
lead to the disclosure of the artifice he had employed, which, as
nothing was to be gained by it, it was well to conceal, stopped short
in his answer and said, ‘Now, who do you think?’

‘It was Kit, it must have been the boy; he played the spy, and you
tampered with him?’ said the old man.

‘How came you to think of him?’ said the dwarf in a tone of great
commiseration.  ‘Yes, it was Kit.  Poor Kit!’

So saying, he nodded in a friendly manner, and took his leave: stopping
when he had passed the outer door a little distance, and grinning with
extraordinary delight.

‘Poor Kit!’ muttered Quilp.  ‘I think it was Kit who said I was an
uglier dwarf than could be seen anywhere for a penny, wasn’t it.  Ha ha
ha!  Poor Kit!’

And with that he went his way, still chuckling as he went.




CHAPTER 10

Daniel Quilp neither entered nor left the old man’s house, unobserved.
In the shadow of an archway nearly opposite, leading to one of the many
passages which diverged from the main street, there lingered one, who,
having taken up his position when the twilight first came on, still
maintained it with undiminished patience, and leaning against the wall
with the manner of a person who had a long time to wait, and being well
used to it was quite resigned, scarcely changed his attitude for the
hour together.

This patient lounger attracted little attention from any of those who
passed, and bestowed as little upon them.  His eyes were constantly
directed towards one object; the window at which the child was
accustomed to sit.  If he withdrew them for a moment, it was only to
glance at a clock in some neighbouring shop, and then to strain his
sight once more in the old quarter with increased earnestness and
attention.

It had been remarked that this personage evinced no weariness in his
place of concealment; nor did he, long as his waiting was.  But as the
time went on, he manifested some anxiety and surprise, glancing at the
clock more frequently and at the window less hopefully than before.  At
length, the clock was hidden from his sight by some envious shutters,
then the church steeples proclaimed eleven at night, then the quarter
past, and then the conviction seemed to obtrude itself on his mind that
it was no use tarrying there any longer.

That the conviction was an unwelcome one, and that he was by no means
willing to yield to it, was apparent from his reluctance to quit the
spot; from the tardy steps with which he often left it, still looking
over his shoulder at the same window; and from the precipitation with
which he as often returned, when a fancied noise or the changing and
imperfect light induced him to suppose it had been softly raised.  At
length, he gave the matter up, as hopeless for that night, and suddenly
breaking into a run as though to force himself away, scampered off at
his utmost speed, nor once ventured to look behind him lest he should
be tempted back again.

Without relaxing his pace, or stopping to take breath, this mysterious
individual dashed on through a great many alleys and narrow ways until
he at length arrived in a square paved court, when he subsided into a
walk, and making for a small house from the window of which a light was
shining, lifted the latch of the door and passed in.

‘Bless us!’ cried a woman turning sharply round, ‘who’s that?  Oh!
It’s you, Kit!’

‘Yes, mother, it’s me.’

‘Why, how tired you look, my dear!’

‘Old master an’t gone out to-night,’ said Kit; ‘and so she hasn’t been
at the window at all.’  With which words, he sat down by the fire and
looked very mournful and discontented.

The room in which Kit sat himself down, in this condition, was an
extremely poor and homely place, but with that air of comfort about it,
nevertheless, which--or the spot must be a wretched one
indeed--cleanliness and order can always impart in some degree.  Late
as the Dutch clock showed it to be, the poor woman was still hard at
work at an ironing-table; a young child lay sleeping in a cradle near
the fire; and another, a sturdy boy of two or three years old, very
wide awake, with a very tight night-cap on his head, and a night-gown
very much too small for him on his body, was sitting bolt upright in a
clothes-basket, staring over the rim with his great round eyes, and
looking as if he had thoroughly made up his mind never to go to sleep
any more; which, as he had already declined to take his natural rest
and had been brought out of bed in consequence, opened a cheerful
prospect for his relations and friends.  It was rather a queer-looking
family: Kit, his mother, and the children, being all strongly alike.

Kit was disposed to be out of temper, as the best of us are too
often--but he looked at the youngest child who was sleeping soundly,
and from him to his other brother in the clothes-basket, and from him
to their mother, who had been at work without complaint since morning,
and thought it would be a better and kinder thing to be good-humoured.
So he rocked the cradle with his foot; made a face at the rebel in the
clothes-basket, which put him in high good-humour directly; and stoutly
determined to be talkative and make himself agreeable.

‘Ah, mother!’ said Kit, taking out his clasp-knife, and falling upon a
great piece of bread and meat which she had had ready for him, hours
before, ‘what a one you are!  There an’t many such as you, I know.’

‘I hope there are many a great deal better, Kit,’ said Mrs Nubbles;
‘and that there are, or ought to be, accordin’ to what the parson at
chapel says.’

‘Much he knows about it,’ returned Kit contemptuously.  ‘Wait till he’s
a widder and works like you do, and gets as little, and does as much,
and keeps his spirit up the same, and then I’ll ask him what’s o’clock
and trust him for being right to half a second.’

‘Well,’ said Mrs Nubbles, evading the point, ‘your beer’s down there by
the fender, Kit.’

‘I see,’ replied her son, taking up the porter pot, ‘my love to you,
mother.  And the parson’s health too if you like.  I don’t bear him any
malice, not I!’

‘Did you tell me, just now, that your master hadn’t gone out to-night?’
inquired Mrs Nubbles.

‘Yes,’ said Kit, ‘worse luck!’

‘You should say better luck, I think,’ returned his mother, ‘because
Miss Nelly won’t have been left alone.’

‘Ah!’ said Kit, ‘I forgot that.  I said worse luck, because I’ve been
watching ever since eight o’clock, and seen nothing of her.’

‘I wonder what she’d say,’ cried his mother, stopping in her work and
looking round, ‘if she knew that every night, when she--poor thing--is
sitting alone at that window, you are watching in the open street for
fear any harm should come to her, and that you never leave the place or
come home to your bed though you’re ever so tired, till such time as
you think she’s safe in hers.’

‘Never mind what she’d say,’ replied Kit, with something like a blush
on his uncouth face; ‘she’ll never know nothing, and consequently,
she’ll never say nothing.’

Mrs Nubbles ironed away in silence for a minute or two, and coming to
the fireplace for another iron, glanced stealthily at Kit while she
rubbed it on a board and dusted it with a duster, but said nothing
until she had returned to her table again: when, holding the iron at an
alarmingly short distance from her cheek, to test its temperature, and
looking round with a smile, she observed:

‘I know what some people would say, Kit--’

‘Nonsense,’ interposed Kit with a perfect apprehension of what was to
follow.

‘No, but they would indeed.  Some people would say that you’d fallen in
love with her, I know they would.’

To this, Kit only replied by bashfully bidding his mother ‘get out,’
and forming sundry strange figures with his legs and arms, accompanied
by sympathetic contortions of his face.  Not deriving from these means
the relief which he sought, he bit off an immense mouthful from the
bread and meat, and took a quick drink of the porter; by which
artificial aids he choked himself and effected a diversion of the
subject.

‘Speaking seriously though, Kit,’ said his mother, taking up the theme
afresh, after a time, ‘for of course I was only in joke just now, it’s
very good and thoughtful, and like you, to do this, and never let
anybody know it, though some day I hope she may come to know it, for
I’m sure she would be very grateful to you and feel it very much.  It’s
a cruel thing to keep the dear child shut up there.  I don’t wonder
that the old gentleman wants to keep it from you.’

‘He don’t think it’s cruel, bless you,’ said Kit, ‘and don’t mean it to
be so, or he wouldn’t do it--I do consider, mother, that he wouldn’t do
it for all the gold and silver in the world.  No, no, that he wouldn’t.
I know him better than that.’

‘Then what does he do it for, and why does he keep it so close from
you?’ said Mrs Nubbles.

‘That I don’t know,’ returned her son.  ‘If he hadn’t tried to keep it
so close though, I should never have found it out, for it was his
getting me away at night and sending me off so much earlier than he
used to, that first made me curious to know what was going on.  Hark!
what’s that?’

‘It’s only somebody outside.’

‘It’s somebody crossing over here,’ said Kit, standing up to listen,
‘and coming very fast too.  He can’t have gone out after I left, and
the house caught fire, mother!’

The boy stood, for a moment, really bereft, by the apprehension he had
conjured up, of the power to move.  The footsteps drew nearer, the door
was opened with a hasty hand, and the child herself, pale and
breathless, and hastily wrapped in a few disordered garments, hurried
into the room.

‘Miss Nelly!  What is the matter!’ cried mother and son together.

‘I must not stay a moment,’ she returned, ‘grandfather has been taken
very ill.  I found him in a fit upon the floor--’

‘I’ll run for a doctor’--said Kit, seizing his brimless hat.  ‘I’ll be
there directly, I’ll--’

‘No, no,’ cried Nell, ‘there is one there, you’re not wanted,
you--you--must never come near us any more!’

‘What!’ roared Kit.

‘Never again,’ said the child.  ‘Don’t ask me why, for I don’t know.
Pray don’t ask me why, pray don’t be sorry, pray don’t be vexed with
me!  I have nothing to do with it indeed!’

Kit looked at her with his eyes stretched wide; and opened and shut his
mouth a great many times; but couldn’t get out one word.

‘He complains and raves of you,’ said the child, ‘I don’t know what you
have done, but I hope it’s nothing very bad.’

‘I done!’ roared Kit.

‘He cried that you’re the cause of all his misery,’ returned the child
with tearful eyes; ‘he screamed and called for you; they say you must
not come near him or he will die.  You must not return to us any more.
I came to tell you.  I thought it would be better that I should come
than somebody quite strange.  Oh, Kit, what have you done?  You, in
whom I trusted so much, and who were almost the only friend I had!’

The unfortunate Kit looked at his young mistress harder and harder, and
with eyes growing wider and wider, but was perfectly motionless and
silent.

‘I have brought his money for the week,’ said the child, looking to the
woman and laying it on the table--‘and--and--a little more, for he was
always good and kind to me.  I hope he will be sorry and do well
somewhere else and not take this to heart too much.  It grieves me very
much to part with him like this, but there is no help.  It must be
done.  Good night!’

With the tears streaming down her face, and her slight figure trembling
with the agitation of the scene she had left, the shock she had
received, the errand she had just discharged, and a thousand painful
and affectionate feelings, the child hastened to the door, and
disappeared as rapidly as she had come.

The poor woman, who had no cause to doubt her son, but every reason for
relying on his honesty and truth, was staggered, notwithstanding, by
his not having advanced one word in his defence.  Visions of gallantry,
knavery, robbery; and of the nightly absences from home for which he
had accounted so strangely, having been occasioned by some unlawful
pursuit; flocked into her brain and rendered her afraid to question
him.  She rocked herself upon a chair, wringing her hands and weeping
bitterly, but Kit made no attempt to comfort her and remained quite
bewildered.  The baby in the cradle woke up and cried; the boy in the
clothes-basket fell over on his back with the basket upon him, and was
seen no more; the mother wept louder yet and rocked faster; but Kit,
insensible to all the din and tumult, remained in a state of utter
stupefaction.




CHAPTER 11

Quiet and solitude were destined to hold uninterrupted rule no longer,
beneath the roof that sheltered the child.  Next morning, the old man
was in a raging fever accompanied with delirium; and sinking under the
influence of this disorder he lay for many weeks in imminent peril of
his life.  There was watching enough, now, but it was the watching of
strangers who made a greedy trade of it, and who, in the intervals in
their attendance upon the sick man huddled together with a ghastly
good-fellowship, and ate and drank and made merry; for disease and
death were their ordinary household gods.

Yet, in all the hurry and crowding of such a time, the child was more
alone than she had ever been before; alone in spirit, alone in her
devotion to him who was wasting away upon his burning bed; alone in her
unfeigned sorrow, and her unpurchased sympathy.  Day after day, and
night after night, found her still by the pillow of the unconscious
sufferer, still anticipating his every want, still listening to those
repetitions of her name and those anxieties and cares for her, which
were ever uppermost among his feverish wanderings.

The house was no longer theirs.  Even the sick chamber seemed to be
retained, on the uncertain tenure of Mr Quilp’s favour.  The old man’s
illness had not lasted many days when he took formal possession of the
premises and all upon them, in virtue of certain legal powers to that
effect, which few understood and none presumed to call in question.
This important step secured, with the assistance of a man of law whom
he brought with him for the purpose, the dwarf proceeded to establish
himself and his coadjutor in the house, as an assertion of his claim
against all comers; and then set about making his quarters comfortable,
after his own fashion.

To this end, Mr Quilp encamped in the back parlour, having first put an
effectual stop to any further business by shutting up the shop.  Having
looked out, from among the old furniture, the handsomest and most
commodious chair he could possibly find (which he reserved for his own
use) and an especially hideous and uncomfortable one (which he
considerately appropriated to the accommodation of his friend) he
caused them to be carried into this room, and took up his position in
great state.  The apartment was very far removed from the old man’s
chamber, but Mr Quilp deemed it prudent, as a precaution against
infection from fever, and a means of wholesome fumigation, not only to
smoke, himself, without cessation, but to insist upon it that his legal
friend did the like.  Moreover, he sent an express to the wharf for the
tumbling boy, who arriving with all despatch was enjoined to sit
himself down in another chair just inside the door, continually to
smoke a great pipe which the dwarf had provided for the purpose, and to
take it from his lips under any pretence whatever, were it only for one
minute at a time, if he dared.  These arrangements completed, Mr Quilp
looked round him with chuckling satisfaction, and remarked that he
called that comfort.

The legal gentleman, whose melodious name was Brass, might have called
it comfort also but for two drawbacks: one was, that he could by no
exertion sit easy in his chair, the seat of which was very hard,
angular, slippery, and sloping; the other, that tobacco-smoke always
caused him great internal discomposure and annoyance.  But as he was
quite a creature of Mr Quilp’s and had a thousand reasons for
conciliating his good opinion, he tried to smile, and nodded his
acquiescence with the best grace he could assume.

This Brass was an attorney of no very good repute, from Bevis Marks in
the city of London; he was a tall, meagre man, with a nose like a wen,
a protruding forehead, retreating eyes, and hair of a deep red.  He
wore a long black surtout reaching nearly to his ankles, short black
trousers, high shoes, and cotton stockings of a bluish grey.  He had a
cringing manner, but a very harsh voice; and his blandest smiles were
so extremely forbidding, that to have had his company under the least
repulsive circumstances, one would have wished him to be out of temper
that he might only scowl.

Quilp looked at his legal adviser, and seeing that he was winking very
much in the anguish of his pipe, that he sometimes shuddered when he
happened to inhale its full flavour, and that he constantly fanned the
smoke from him, was quite overjoyed and rubbed his hands with glee.

‘Smoke away, you dog,’ said Quilp, turning to the boy; ‘fill your pipe
again and smoke it fast, down to the last whiff, or I’ll put the
sealing-waxed end of it in the fire and rub it red hot upon your
tongue.’

Luckily the boy was case-hardened, and would have smoked a small
lime-kiln if anybody had treated him with it.  Wherefore, he only
muttered a brief defiance of his master, and did as he was ordered.

‘Is it good, Brass, is it nice, is it fragrant, do you feel like the
Grand Turk?’ said Quilp.

Mr Brass thought that if he did, the Grand Turk’s feelings were by no
means to be envied, but he said it was famous, and he had no doubt he
felt very like that Potentate.

‘This is the way to keep off fever,’ said Quilp, ‘this is the way to
keep off every calamity of life!  We’ll never leave off, all the time
we stop here--smoke away, you dog, or you shall swallow the pipe!’

‘Shall we stop here long, Mr Quilp?’ inquired his legal friend, when
the dwarf had given his boy this gentle admonition.

‘We must stop, I suppose, till the old gentleman up stairs is dead,’
returned Quilp.

‘He he he!’ laughed Mr Brass, ‘oh! very good!’

‘Smoke away!’ cried Quilp.  ‘Never stop!  You can talk as you smoke.
Don’t lose time.’

‘He he he!’ cried Brass faintly, as he again applied himself to the
odious pipe.  ‘But if he should get better, Mr Quilp?’

‘Then we shall stop till he does, and no longer,’ returned the dwarf.

‘How kind it is of you, Sir, to wait till then!’ said Brass.  ‘Some
people, Sir, would have sold or removed the goods--oh dear, the very
instant the law allowed ‘em.  Some people, Sir, would have been all
flintiness and granite.  Some people, sir, would have--’

‘Some people would have spared themselves the jabbering of such a
parrot as you,’ interposed the dwarf.

‘He he he!’ cried Brass.  ‘You have such spirits!’

The smoking sentinel at the door interposed in this place, and without
taking his pipe from his lips, growled,

‘Here’s the gal a comin’ down.’

‘The what, you dog?’ said Quilp.

‘The gal,’ returned the boy.  ‘Are you deaf?’

‘Oh!’ said Quilp, drawing in his breath with great relish as if he were
taking soup, ‘you and I will have such a settling presently; there’s
such a scratching and bruising in store for you, my dear young friend!
Aha! Nelly!  How is he now, my duck of diamonds?’

‘He’s very bad,’ replied the weeping child.

‘What a pretty little Nell!’ cried Quilp.

‘Oh beautiful, sir, beautiful indeed,’ said Brass.  ‘Quite charming.’

‘Has she come to sit upon Quilp’s knee,’ said the dwarf, in what he
meant to be a soothing tone, ‘or is she going to bed in her own little
room inside here?  Which is poor Nelly going to do?’

‘What a remarkable pleasant way he has with children!’ muttered Brass,
as if in confidence between himself and the ceiling; ‘upon my word it’s
quite a treat to hear him.’

‘I’m not going to stay at all,’ faltered Nell.  ‘I want a few things
out of that room, and then I--I--won’t come down here any more.’

‘And a very nice little room it is!’ said the dwarf looking into it as
the child entered.  ‘Quite a bower!  You’re sure you’re not going to
use it; you’re sure you’re not coming back, Nelly?’

‘No,’ replied the child, hurrying away, with the few articles of dress
she had come to remove; ‘never again!  Never again.’

‘She’s very sensitive,’ said Quilp, looking after her.  ‘Very
sensitive; that’s a pity.  The bedstead is much about my size.  I think
I shall make it MY little room.’

Mr Brass encouraging this idea, as he would have encouraged any other
emanating from the same source, the dwarf walked in to try the effect.
This he did, by throwing himself on his back upon the bed with his pipe
in his mouth, and then kicking up his legs and smoking violently.  Mr
Brass applauding this picture very much, and the bed being soft and
comfortable, Mr Quilp determined to use it, both as a sleeping place by
night and as a kind of Divan by day; and in order that it might be
converted to the latter purpose at once, remained where he was, and
smoked his pipe out.  The legal gentleman being by this time rather
giddy and perplexed in his ideas (for this was one of the operations of
the tobacco on his nervous system), took the opportunity of slinking
away into the open air, where, in course of time, he recovered
sufficiently to return with a countenance of tolerable composure.  He
was soon led on by the malicious dwarf to smoke himself into a relapse,
and in that state stumbled upon a settee where he slept till morning.

Such were Mr Quilp’s first proceedings on entering upon his new
property.  He was, for some days, restrained by business from
performing any particular pranks, as his time was pretty well occupied
between taking, with the assistance of Mr Brass, a minute inventory of
all the goods in the place, and going abroad upon his other concerns
which happily engaged him for several hours at a time.  His avarice and
caution being, now, thoroughly awakened, however, he was never absent
from the house one night; and his eagerness for some termination, good
or bad, to the old man’s disorder, increasing rapidly, as the time
passed by, soon began to vent itself in open murmurs and exclamations
of impatience.

Nell shrank timidly from all the dwarf’s advances towards conversation,
and fled from the very sound of his voice; nor were the lawyer’s smiles
less terrible to her than Quilp’s grimaces.  She lived in such
continual dread and apprehension of meeting one or other of them on the
stairs or in the passages if she stirred from her grandfather’s
chamber, that she seldom left it, for a moment, until late at night,
when the silence encouraged her to venture forth and breathe the purer
air of some empty room.

One night, she had stolen to her usual window, and was sitting there
very sorrowfully--for the old man had been worse that day--when she
thought she heard her name pronounced by a voice in the street.
Looking down, she recognised Kit, whose endeavours to attract her
attention had roused her from her sad reflections.

‘Miss Nell!’ said the boy in a low voice.

‘Yes,’ replied the child, doubtful whether she ought to hold any
communication with the supposed culprit, but inclining to her old
favourite still; ‘what do you want?’

‘I have wanted to say a word to you, for a long time,’ the boy replied,
‘but the people below have driven me away and wouldn’t let me see you.
You don’t believe--I hope you don’t really believe--that I deserve to
be cast off as I have been; do you, miss?’

‘I must believe it,’ returned the child.  ‘Or why would grandfather
have been so angry with you?’

‘I don’t know,’ replied Kit.  ‘I’m sure I never deserved it from him,
no, nor from you.  I can say that, with a true and honest heart, any
way.  And then to be driven from the door, when I only came to ask how
old master was--!’

‘They never told me that,’ said the child.  ‘I didn’t know it indeed.
I wouldn’t have had them do it for the world.’

‘Thank’ee, miss,’ returned Kit, ‘it’s comfortable to hear you say that.
I said I never would believe that it was your doing.’

‘That was right!’ said the child eagerly.

‘Miss Nell,’ cried the boy coming under the window, and speaking in a
lower tone, ‘there are new masters down stairs.  It’s a change for you.’

‘It is indeed,’ replied the child.

‘And so it will be for him when he gets better,’ said the boy, pointing
towards the sick room.

‘--If he ever does,’ added the child, unable to restrain her tears.

‘Oh, he’ll do that, he’ll do that,’ said Kit.  ‘I’m sure he will.  You
mustn’t be cast down, Miss Nell.  Now don’t be, pray!’

These words of encouragement and consolation were few and roughly said,
but they affected the child and made her, for the moment, weep the more.

‘He’ll be sure to get better now,’ said the boy anxiously, ‘if you
don’t give way to low spirits and turn ill yourself, which would make
him worse and throw him back, just as he was recovering.  When he does,
say a good word--say a kind word for me, Miss Nell!’

‘They tell me I must not even mention your name to him for a long, long
time,’ rejoined the child, ‘I dare not; and even if I might, what good
would a kind word do you, Kit?  We shall be very poor.  We shall
scarcely have bread to eat.’

‘It’s not that I may be taken back,’ said the boy, ‘that I ask the
favour of you.  It isn’t for the sake of food and wages that I’ve been
waiting about so long in hopes to see you.  Don’t think that I’d come
in a time of trouble to talk of such things as them.’

The child looked gratefully and kindly at him, but waited that he might
speak again.

‘No, it’s not that,’ said Kit hesitating, ‘it’s something very
different from that.  I haven’t got much sense, I know, but if he could
be brought to believe that I’d been a faithful servant to him, doing
the best I could, and never meaning harm, perhaps he mightn’t--’

Here Kit faltered so long that the child entreated him to speak out,
and quickly, for it was very late, and time to shut the window.

‘Perhaps he mightn’t think it over venturesome of me to say--well then,
to say this,’ cried Kit with sudden boldness.  ‘This home is gone from
you and him.  Mother and I have got a poor one, but that’s better than
this with all these people here; and why not come there, till he’s had
time to look about, and find a better!’

The child did not speak.  Kit, in the relief of having made his
proposition, found his tongue loosened, and spoke out in its favour
with his utmost eloquence.

‘You think,’ said the boy, ‘that it’s very small and inconvenient.  So
it is, but it’s very clean.  Perhaps you think it would be noisy, but
there’s not a quieter court than ours in all the town.  Don’t be afraid
of the children; the baby hardly ever cries, and the other one is very
good--besides, I’d mind ‘em.  They wouldn’t vex you much, I’m sure.  Do
try, Miss Nell, do try.  The little front room up stairs is very
pleasant.  You can see a piece of the church-clock, through the
chimneys, and almost tell the time; mother says it would be just the
thing for you, and so it would, and you’d have her to wait upon you
both, and me to run of errands.  We don’t mean money, bless you; you’re
not to think of that!  Will you try him, Miss Nell?  Only say you’ll
try him.  Do try to make old master come, and ask him first what I have
done.  Will you only promise that, Miss Nell?’

Before the child could reply to this earnest solicitation, the
street-door opened, and Mr Brass thrusting out his night-capped head
called in a surly voice, ‘Who’s there!’  Kit immediately glided away,
and Nell, closing the window softly, drew back into the room.

Before Mr Brass had repeated his inquiry many times, Mr Quilp, also
embellished with a night-cap, emerged from the same door and looked
carefully up and down the street, and up at all the windows of the
house, from the opposite side.  Finding that there was nobody in sight,
he presently returned into the house with his legal friend, protesting
(as the child heard from the staircase), that there was a league and
plot against him; that he was in danger of being robbed and plundered
by a band of conspirators who prowled about the house at all seasons;
and that he would delay no longer but take immediate steps for
disposing of the property and returning to his own peaceful roof.
Having growled forth these, and a great many other threats of the same
nature, he coiled himself once more in the child’s little bed, and Nell
crept softly up the stairs.

It was natural enough that her short and unfinished dialogue with Kit
should leave a strong impression on her mind, and influence her dreams
that night and her recollections for a long, long time.  Surrounded by
unfeeling creditors, and mercenary attendants upon the sick, and
meeting in the height of her anxiety and sorrow with little regard or
sympathy even from the women about her, it is not surprising that the
affectionate heart of the child should have been touched to the quick
by one kind and generous spirit, however uncouth the temple in which it
dwelt.  Thank Heaven that the temples of such spirits are not made with
hands, and that they may be even more worthily hung with poor
patch-work than with purple and fine linen!




CHAPTER 12

At length, the crisis of the old man’s disorder was past, and he began
to mend.  By very slow and feeble degrees his consciousness came back;
but the mind was weakened and its functions were impaired.  He was
patient, and quiet; often sat brooding, but not despondently, for a
long space; was easily amused, even by a sun-beam on the wall or
ceiling; made no complaint that the days were long, or the nights
tedious; and appeared indeed to have lost all count of time, and every
sense of care or weariness.  He would sit, for hours together, with
Nell’s small hand in his, playing with the fingers and stopping
sometimes to smooth her hair or kiss her brow; and, when he saw that
tears were glistening in her eyes, would look, amazed, about him for
the cause, and forget his wonder even while he looked.

The child and he rode out; the old man propped up with pillows, and the
child beside him.  They were hand in hand as usual.  The noise and
motion in the streets fatigued his brain at first, but he was not
surprised, or curious, or pleased, or irritated.  He was asked if he
remembered this, or that.  ‘O yes,’ he said, ‘quite well--why not?’
Sometimes he turned his head, and looked, with earnest gaze and
outstretched neck, after some stranger in the crowd, until he
disappeared from sight; but, to the question why he did this, he
answered not a word.

He was sitting in his easy chair one day, and Nell upon a stool beside
him, when a man outside the door inquired if he might enter.  ‘Yes,’ he
said without emotion, ‘it was Quilp, he knew.  Quilp was master there.
Of course he might come in.’  And so he did.

‘I’m glad to see you well again at last, neighbour,’ said the dwarf,
sitting down opposite him.  ‘You’re quite strong now?’

‘Yes,’ said the old man feebly, ‘yes.’

‘I don’t want to hurry you, you know, neighbour,’ said the dwarf,
raising his voice, for the old man’s senses were duller than they had
been; ‘but, as soon as you can arrange your future proceedings, the
better.’

‘Surely,’ said the old man.  ‘The better for all parties.’

‘You see,’ pursued Quilp after a short pause, ‘the goods being once
removed, this house would be uncomfortable; uninhabitable in fact.’

‘You say true,’ returned the old man.  ‘Poor Nell too, what would she
do?’

‘Exactly,’ bawled the dwarf nodding his head; ‘that’s very well
observed.  Then will you consider about it, neighbour?’

‘I will, certainly,’ replied the old man.  ‘We shall not stop here.’

‘So I supposed,’ said the dwarf.  ‘I have sold the things.  They have
not yielded quite as much as they might have done, but pretty
well--pretty well.  To-day’s Tuesday.  When shall they be moved?
There’s no hurry--shall we say this afternoon?’

‘Say Friday morning,’ returned the old man.

‘Very good,’ said the dwarf.  ‘So be it--with the understanding that I
can’t go beyond that day, neighbour, on any account.’

‘Good,’ returned the old man.  ‘I shall remember it.’

Mr Quilp seemed rather puzzled by the strange, even spiritless way in
which all this was said; but as the old man nodded his head and
repeated ‘on Friday morning.  I shall remember it,’ he had no excuse
for dwelling on the subject any further, and so took a friendly leave
with many expressions of good-will and many compliments to his friend
on his looking so remarkably well; and went below stairs to report
progress to Mr Brass.

All that day, and all the next, the old man remained in this state.  He
wandered up and down the house and into and out of the various rooms,
as if with some vague intent of bidding them adieu, but he referred
neither by direct allusions nor in any other manner to the interview of
the morning or the necessity of finding some other shelter.  An
indistinct idea he had, that the child was desolate and in want of
help; for he often drew her to his bosom and bade her be of good cheer,
saying that they would not desert each other; but he seemed unable to
contemplate their real position more distinctly, and was still the
listless, passionless creature that suffering of mind and body had left
him.

We call this a state of childishness, but it is the same poor hollow
mockery of it, that death is of sleep.  Where, in the dull eyes of
doating men, are the laughing light and life of childhood, the gaiety
that has known no check, the frankness that has felt no chill, the hope
that has never withered, the joys that fade in blossoming?  Where, in
the sharp lineaments of rigid and unsightly death, is the calm beauty
of slumber, telling of rest for the waking hours that are past, and
gentle hopes and loves for those which are to come?  Lay death and
sleep down, side by side, and say who shall find the two akin.  Send
forth the child and childish man together, and blush for the pride that
libels our own old happy state, and gives its title to an ugly and
distorted image.

Thursday arrived, and there was no alteration in the old man.  But a
change came upon him that evening as he and the child sat silently
together.

In a small dull yard below his window, there was a tree--green and
flourishing enough, for such a place--and as the air stirred among its
leaves, it threw a rippling shadow on the white wall.  The old man sat
watching the shadows as they trembled in this patch of light, until the
sun went down; and when it was night, and the moon was slowly rising,
he still sat in the same spot.

To one who had been tossing on a restless bed so long, even these few
green leaves and this tranquil light, although it languished among
chimneys and house-tops, were pleasant things.  They suggested quiet
places afar off, and rest, and peace.  The child thought, more than
once that he was moved: and had forborne to speak.  But now he shed
tears--tears that it lightened her aching heart to see--and making as
though he would fall upon his knees, besought her to forgive him.

‘Forgive you--what?’ said Nell, interposing to prevent his purpose.
‘Oh grandfather, what should I forgive?’

‘All that is past, all that has come upon thee, Nell, all that was done
in that uneasy dream,’ returned the old man.

‘Do not talk so,’ said the child.  ‘Pray do not.  Let us speak of
something else.’

‘Yes, yes, we will,’ he rejoined.  ‘And it shall be of what we talked
of long ago--many months--months is it, or weeks, or days?  which is it
Nell?’

‘I do not understand you,’ said the child.

‘It has come back upon me to-day, it has all come back since we have
been sitting here.  I bless thee for it, Nell!’

‘For what, dear grandfather?’

‘For what you said when we were first made beggars, Nell.  Let us speak
softly.  Hush!  for if they knew our purpose down stairs, they would
cry that I was mad and take thee from me.  We will not stop here
another day.  We will go far away from here.’

‘Yes, let us go,’ said the child earnestly.  ‘Let us begone from this
place, and never turn back or think of it again.  Let us wander
barefoot through the world, rather than linger here.’

‘We will,’ answered the old man, ‘we will travel afoot through the
fields and woods, and by the side of rivers, and trust ourselves to God
in the places where He dwells.  It is far better to lie down at night
beneath an open sky like that yonder--see how bright it is--than to
rest in close rooms which are always full of care and weary dreams.
Thou and I together, Nell, may be cheerful and happy yet, and learn to
forget this time, as if it had never been.’

‘We will be happy,’ cried the child.  ‘We never can be here.’

‘No, we never can again--never again--that’s truly said,’ rejoined the
old man.  ‘Let us steal away to-morrow morning--early and softly, that
we may not be seen or heard--and leave no trace or track for them to
follow by.  Poor Nell!  Thy cheek is pale, and thy eyes are heavy with
watching and weeping for me--I know--for me; but thou wilt be well
again, and merry too, when we are far away.  To-morrow morning, dear,
we’ll turn our faces from this scene of sorrow, and be as free and
happy as the birds.’

And then the old man clasped his hands above her head, and said, in a
few broken words, that from that time forth they would wander up and
down together, and never part more until Death took one or other of the
twain.

The child’s heart beat high with hope and confidence.  She had no
thought of hunger, or cold, or thirst, or suffering.  She saw in this,
but a return of the simple pleasures they had once enjoyed, a relief
from the gloomy solitude in which she had lived, an escape from the
heartless people by whom she had been surrounded in her late time of
trial, the restoration of the old man’s health and peace, and a life of
tranquil happiness.  Sun, and stream, and meadow, and summer days,
shone brightly in her view, and there was no dark tint in all the
sparkling picture.

The old man had slept, for some hours, soundly in his bed, and she was
yet busily engaged in preparing for their flight.  There were a few
articles of clothing for herself to carry, and a few for him; old
garments, such as became their fallen fortunes, laid out to wear; and a
staff to support his feeble steps, put ready for his use.  But this was
not all her task; for now she must visit the old rooms for the last
time.

And how different the parting with them was, from any she had expected,
and most of all from that which she had oftenest pictured to herself.
How could she ever have thought of bidding them farewell in triumph,
when the recollection of the many hours she had passed among them rose
to her swelling heart, and made her feel the wish a cruelty: lonely and
sad though many of those hours had been!  She sat down at the window
where she had spent so many evenings--darker far than this--and every
thought of hope or cheerfulness that had occurred to her in that place
came vividly upon her mind, and blotted out all its dull and mournful
associations in an instant.

Her own little room too, where she had so often knelt down and prayed
at night--prayed for the time which she hoped was dawning now--the
little room where she had slept so peacefully, and dreamed such
pleasant dreams!  It was hard not to be able to glance round it once
more, and to be forced to leave it without one kind look or grateful
tear.  There were some trifles there--poor useless things--that she
would have liked to take away; but that was impossible.

This brought to mind her bird, her poor bird, who hung there yet.  She
wept bitterly for the loss of this little creature--until the idea
occurred to her--she did not know how, or why, it came into her
head--that it might, by some means, fall into the hands of Kit who
would keep it for her sake, and think, perhaps, that she had left it
behind in the hope that he might have it, and as an assurance that she
was grateful to him.  She was calmed and comforted by the thought, and
went to rest with a lighter heart.

From many dreams of rambling through light and sunny places, but with
some vague object unattained which ran indistinctly through them all,
she awoke to find that it was yet night, and that the stars were
shining brightly in the sky.  At length, the day began to glimmer, and
the stars to grow pale and dim.  As soon as she was sure of this, she
arose, and dressed herself for the journey.

The old man was yet asleep, and as she was unwilling to disturb him,
she left him to slumber on, until the sun rose.  He was anxious that
they should leave the house without a minute’s loss of time, and was
soon ready.

The child then took him by the hand, and they trod lightly and
cautiously down the stairs, trembling whenever a board creaked, and
often stopping to listen.  The old man had forgotten a kind of wallet
which contained the light burden he had to carry; and the going back a
few steps to fetch it seemed an interminable delay.

At last they reached the passage on the ground floor, where the snoring
of Mr Quilp and his legal friend sounded more terrible in their ears
than the roars of lions.  The bolts of the door were rusty, and
difficult to unfasten without noise.  When they were all drawn back, it
was found to be locked, and worst of all, the key was gone.  Then the
child remembered, for the first time, one of the nurses having told her
that Quilp always locked both the house-doors at night, and kept the
keys on the table in his bedroom.

It was not without great fear and trepidation that little Nell slipped
off her shoes and gliding through the store-room of old curiosities,
where Mr Brass--the ugliest piece of goods in all the stock--lay
sleeping on a mattress, passed into her own little chamber.

Here she stood, for a few moments, quite transfixed with terror at the
sight of Mr Quilp, who was hanging so far out of bed that he almost
seemed to be standing on his head, and who, either from the uneasiness
of this posture, or in one of his agreeable habits, was gasping and
growling with his mouth wide open, and the whites (or rather the dirty
yellows) of his eyes distinctly visible.  It was no time, however, to
ask whether anything ailed him; so, possessing herself of the key after
one hasty glance about the room, and repassing the prostrate Mr Brass,
she rejoined the old man in safety.  They got the door open without
noise, and passing into the street, stood still.

‘Which way?’ said the child.

The old man looked, irresolutely and helplessly, first at her, then to
the right and left, then at her again, and shook his head.  It was
plain that she was thenceforth his guide and leader.  The child felt
it, but had no doubts or misgiving, and putting her hand in his, led
him gently away.

It was the beginning of a day in June; the deep blue sky unsullied by a
cloud, and teeming with brilliant light.  The streets were, as yet,
nearly free from passengers, the houses and shops were closed, and the
healthy air of morning fell like breath from angels, on the sleeping
town.

The old man and the child passed on through the glad silence, elate
with hope and pleasure.  They were alone together, once again; every
object was bright and fresh; nothing reminded them, otherwise than by
contrast, of the monotony and constraint they had left behind; church
towers and steeples, frowning and dark at other times, now shone in the
sun; each humble nook and corner rejoiced in light; and the sky, dimmed
only by excessive distance, shed its placid smile on everything beneath.

Forth from the city, while it yet slumbered, went the two poor
adventurers, wandering they knew not whither.




CHAPTER 13

Daniel Quilp of Tower Hill, and Sampson Brass of Bevis Marks in the
city of London, Gentleman, one of her Majesty’s attornies of the Courts
of the King’s Bench and Common Pleas at Westminster and a solicitor of
the High Court of Chancery, slumbered on, unconscious and unsuspicious
of any mischance, until a knocking on the street door, often repeated
and gradually mounting up from a modest single rap to a perfect battery
of knocks, fired in long discharges with a very short interval between,
caused the said Daniel Quilp to struggle into a horizontal position,
and to stare at the ceiling with a drowsy indifference, betokening that
he heard the noise and rather wondered at the same, and couldn’t be at
the trouble of bestowing any further thought upon the subject.

As the knocking, however, instead of accommodating itself to his lazy
state, increased in vigour and became more importunate, as if in
earnest remonstrance against his falling asleep again, now that he had
once opened his eyes, Daniel Quilp began by degrees to comprehend the
possibility of there being somebody at the door; and thus he gradually
came to recollect that it was Friday morning, and he had ordered Mrs
Quilp to be in waiting upon him at an early hour.

Mr Brass, after writhing about, in a great many strange attitudes, and
often twisting his face and eyes into an expression like that which is
usually produced by eating gooseberries very early in the season, was
by this time awake also.  Seeing that Mr Quilp invested himself in his
every-day garments, he hastened to do the like, putting on his shoes
before his stockings, and thrusting his legs into his coat sleeves, and
making such other small mistakes in his toilet as are not uncommon to
those who dress in a hurry, and labour under the agitation of having
been suddenly roused.

While the attorney was thus engaged, the dwarf was groping under the
table, muttering desperate imprecations on himself, and mankind in
general, and all inanimate objects to boot, which suggested to Mr Brass
the question, ‘what’s the matter?’

‘The key,’ said the dwarf, looking viciously about him, ‘the
door-key--that’s the matter.  D’ye know anything of it?’

‘How should I know anything of it, sir?’ returned Mr Brass.

‘How should you?’ repeated Quilp with a sneer.  ‘You’re a nice lawyer,
an’t you?  Ugh, you idiot!’

Not caring to represent to the dwarf in his present humour, that the
loss of a key by another person could scarcely be said to affect his
(Brass’s) legal knowledge in any material degree, Mr Brass humbly
suggested that it must have been forgotten over night, and was,
doubtless, at that moment in its native key-hole.  Notwithstanding that
Mr Quilp had a strong conviction to the contrary, founded on his
recollection of having carefully taken it out, he was fain to admit
that this was possible, and therefore went grumbling to the door where,
sure enough, he found it.

Now, just as Mr Quilp laid his hand upon the lock, and saw with great
astonishment that the fastenings were undone, the knocking came again
with the most irritating violence, and the daylight which had been
shining through the key-hole was intercepted on the outside by a human
eye.  The dwarf was very much exasperated, and wanting somebody to
wreak his ill-humour upon, determined to dart out suddenly, and favour
Mrs Quilp with a gentle acknowledgment of her attention in making that
hideous uproar.

With this view, he drew back the lock very silently and softly, and
opening the door all at once, pounced out upon the person on the other
side, who had at that moment raised the knocker for another
application, and at whom the dwarf ran head first: throwing out his
hands and feet together, and biting the air in the fulness of his
malice.

So far, however, from rushing upon somebody who offered no resistance
and implored his mercy, Mr Quilp was no sooner in the arms of the
individual whom he had taken for his wife than he found himself
complimented with two staggering blows on the head, and two more, of
the same quality, in the chest; and closing with his assailant, such a
shower of buffets rained down upon his person as sufficed to convince
him that he was in skilful and experienced hands.  Nothing daunted by
this reception, he clung tight to his opponent, and bit and hammered
away with such good-will and heartiness, that it was at least a couple
of minutes before he was dislodged.  Then, and not until then, Daniel
Quilp found himself, all flushed and dishevelled, in the middle of the
street, with Mr Richard Swiveller performing a kind of dance round him
and requiring to know ‘whether he wanted any more?’

‘There’s plenty more of it at the same shop,’ said Mr Swiveller, by
turns advancing and retreating in a threatening attitude, ‘a large and
extensive assortment always on hand--country orders executed with
promptitude and despatch--will you have a little more, Sir--don’t say
no, if you’d rather not.’

‘I thought it was somebody else,’ said Quilp, rubbing his shoulders,
‘why didn’t you say who you were?’

‘Why didn’t you say who YOU were?’ returned Dick, ‘instead of flying
out of the house like a Bedlamite?’

‘It was you that--that knocked,’ said the dwarf, getting up with a
short groan, ‘was it?’

‘Yes, I am the man,’ replied Dick.  ‘That lady had begun when I came,
but she knocked too soft, so I relieved her.’  As he said this, he
pointed towards Mrs Quilp, who stood trembling at a little distance.

‘Humph!’ muttered the dwarf, darting an angry look at his wife, ‘I
thought it was your fault!  And you, sir--don’t you know there has been
somebody ill here, that you knock as if you’d beat the door down?’

‘Damme!’ answered Dick, ‘that’s why I did it.  I thought there was
somebody dead here.’

‘You came for some purpose, I suppose,’ said Quilp.  ‘What is it you
want?’

‘I want to know how the old gentleman is,’ rejoined Mr Swiveller, ‘and
to hear from Nell herself, with whom I should like to have a little
talk.  I’m a friend of the family, sir--at least I’m the friend of one
of the family, and that’s the same thing.’

‘You’d better walk in then,’ said the dwarf.  ‘Go on, sir, go on.  Now,
Mrs Quilp--after you, ma’am.’

Mrs Quilp hesitated, but Mr Quilp insisted.  And it was not a contest
of politeness, or by any means a matter of form, for she knew very well
that her husband wished to enter the house in this order, that he might
have a favourable opportunity of inflicting a few pinches on her arms,
which were seldom free from impressions of his fingers in black and
blue colours.  Mr Swiveller, who was not in the secret, was a little
surprised to hear a suppressed scream, and, looking round, to see Mrs
Quilp following him with a sudden jerk; but he did not remark on these
appearances, and soon forgot them.

‘Now, Mrs Quilp,’ said the dwarf when they had entered the shop, ‘go
you up stairs, if you please, to Nelly’s room, and tell her that she’s
wanted.’

‘You seem to make yourself at home here,’ said Dick, who was
unacquainted with Mr Quilp’s authority.

‘I AM at home, young gentleman,’ returned the dwarf.

Dick was pondering what these words might mean, and still more what the
presence of Mr Brass might mean, when Mrs Quilp came hurrying down
stairs, declaring that the rooms above were empty.

‘Empty, you fool!’ said the dwarf.

‘I give you my word, Quilp,’ answered his trembling wife, ‘that I have
been into every room and there’s not a soul in any of them.’

‘And that,’ said Mr Brass, clapping his hands once, with an emphasis,
‘explains the mystery of the key!’

Quilp looked frowningly at him, and frowningly at his wife, and
frowningly at Richard Swiveller; but, receiving no enlightenment from
any of them, hurried up stairs, whence he soon hurried down again,
confirming the report which had already been made.

‘It’s a strange way of going,’ he said, glancing at Swiveller, ‘very
strange not to communicate with me who am such a close and intimate
friend of his!  Ah! he’ll write to me no doubt, or he’ll bid Nelly
write--yes, yes, that’s what he’ll do.  Nelly’s very fond of me.
Pretty Nell!’

Mr Swiveller looked, as he was, all open-mouthed astonishment.  Still
glancing furtively at him, Quilp turned to Mr Brass and observed, with
assumed carelessness, that this need not interfere with the removal of
the goods.

‘For indeed,’ he added, ‘we knew that they’d go away to-day, but not
that they’d go so early, or so quietly.  But they have their reasons,
they have their reasons.’

‘Where in the devil’s name are they gone?’ said the wondering Dick.

Quilp shook his head, and pursed up his lips, in a manner which implied
that he knew very well, but was not at liberty to say.

‘And what,’ said Dick, looking at the confusion about him, ‘what do you
mean by moving the goods?’

‘That I have bought ‘em, Sir,’ rejoined Quilp.  ‘Eh?  What then?’

‘Has the sly old fox made his fortune then, and gone to live in a
tranquil cot in a pleasant spot with a distant view of the changing
sea?’ said Dick, in great bewilderment.

‘Keeping his place of retirement very close, that he may not be visited
too often by affectionate grandsons and their devoted friends, eh?’
added the dwarf, rubbing his hands hard; ‘I say nothing, but is that
your meaning?’

Richard Swiveller was utterly aghast at this unexpected alteration of
circumstances, which threatened the complete overthrow of the project
in which he bore so conspicuous a part, and seemed to nip his prospects
in the bud.  Having only received from Frederick Trent, late on the
previous night, information of the old man’s illness, he had come upon
a visit of condolence and inquiry to Nell, prepared with the first
instalment of that long train of fascinations which was to fire her
heart at last.  And here, when he had been thinking of all kinds of
graceful and insinuating approaches, and meditating on the fearful
retaliation which was slowly working against Sophy Wackles--here were
Nell, the old man, and all the money gone, melted away, decamped he
knew not whither, as if with a fore-knowledge of the scheme and a
resolution to defeat it in the very outset, before a step was taken.

In his secret heart, Daniel Quilp was both surprised and troubled by
the flight which had been made.  It had not escaped his keen eye that
some indispensable articles of clothing were gone with the fugitives,
and knowing the old man’s weak state of mind, he marvelled what that
course of proceeding might be in which he had so readily procured the
concurrence of the child.  It must not be supposed (or it would be a
gross injustice to Mr Quilp) that he was tortured by any disinterested
anxiety on behalf of either.  His uneasiness arose from a misgiving
that the old man had some secret store of money which he had not
suspected; and the idea of its escaping his clutches, overwhelmed him
with mortification and self-reproach.

In this frame of mind, it was some consolation to him to find that
Richard Swiveller was, for different reasons, evidently irritated and
disappointed by the same cause.  It was plain, thought the dwarf, that
he had come there, on behalf of his friend, to cajole or frighten the
old man out of some small fraction of that wealth of which they
supposed him to have an abundance.  Therefore, it was a relief to vex
his heart with a picture of the riches the old man hoarded, and to
expatiate on his cunning in removing himself even beyond the reach of
importunity.

‘Well,’ said Dick, with a blank look, ‘I suppose it’s of no use my
staying here.’

‘Not the least in the world,’ rejoined the dwarf.

‘You’ll mention that I called, perhaps?’ said Dick.

Mr Quilp nodded, and said he certainly would, the very first time he
saw them.

‘And say,’ added Mr Swiveller, ‘say, sir, that I was wafted here upon
the pinions of concord; that I came to remove, with the rake of
friendship, the seeds of mutual violence and heart-burning, and to sow
in their place, the germs of social harmony.  Will you have the
goodness to charge yourself with that commission, Sir?’

‘Certainly!’ rejoined Quilp.

‘Will you be kind enough to add to it, Sir,’ said Dick, producing a
very small limp card, ‘that that is my address, and that I am to be
found at home every morning.  Two distinct knocks, sir, will produce
the slavey at any time.  My particular friends, Sir, are accustomed to
sneeze when the door is opened, to give her to understand that they ARE
my friends and have no interested motives in asking if I’m at home.  I
beg your pardon; will you allow me to look at that card again?’

‘Oh! by all means,’ rejoined Quilp.

‘By a slight and not unnatural mistake, sir,’ said Dick, substituting
another in its stead, ‘I had handed you the pass-ticket of a select
convivial circle called the Glorious Apollers of which I have the
honour to be Perpetual Grand.  That is the proper document, Sir.  Good
morning.’

Quilp bade him good day; the perpetual Grand Master of the Glorious
Apollers, elevating his hat in honour of Mrs Quilp, dropped it
carelessly on the side of his head again, and disappeared with a
flourish.

By this time, certain vans had arrived for the conveyance of the goods,
and divers strong men in caps were balancing chests of drawers and
other trifles of that nature upon their heads, and performing muscular
feats which heightened their complexions considerably.  Not to be
behind-hand in the bustle, Mr Quilp went to work with surprising
vigour; hustling and driving the people about, like an evil spirit;
setting Mrs Quilp upon all kinds of arduous and impracticable tasks;
carrying great weights up and down, with no apparent effort; kicking
the boy from the wharf, whenever he could get near him; and inflicting,
with his loads, a great many sly bumps and blows on the shoulders of Mr
Brass, as he stood upon the door-steps to answer all the inquiries of
curious neighbours, which was his department.  His presence and example
diffused such alacrity among the persons employed, that, in a few
hours, the house was emptied of everything, but pieces of matting,
empty porter-pots, and scattered fragments of straw.

Seated, like an African chief, on one of these pieces of matting, the
dwarf was regaling himself in the parlour, with bread and cheese and
beer, when he observed without appearing to do so, that a boy was
prying in at the outer door.  Assured that it was Kit, though he saw
little more than his nose, Mr Quilp hailed him by his name; whereupon
Kit came in and demanded what he wanted.

‘Come here, you sir,’ said the dwarf.  ‘Well, so your old master and
young mistress have gone?’

‘Where?’ rejoined Kit, looking round.

‘Do you mean to say you don’t know where?’ answered Quilp sharply.
‘Where have they gone, eh?’

‘I don’t know,’ said Kit.

‘Come,’ retorted Quilp, ‘let’s have no more of this!  Do you mean to
say that you don’t know they went away by stealth, as soon as it was
light this morning?’

‘No,’ said the boy, in evident surprise.

‘You don’t know that?’ cried Quilp.  ‘Don’t I know that you were
hanging about the house the other night, like a thief, eh?  Weren’t you
told then?’

‘No,’ replied the boy.

‘You were not?’ said Quilp.  ‘What were you told then; what were you
talking about?’

Kit, who knew no particular reason why he should keep the matter secret
now, related the purpose for which he had come on that occasion, and
the proposal he had made.

‘Oh!’ said the dwarf after a little consideration.  ‘Then, I think
they’ll come to you yet.’

‘Do you think they will?’ cried Kit eagerly.

‘Aye, I think they will,’ returned the dwarf.  ‘Now, when they do, let
me know; d’ye hear?  Let me know, and I’ll give you something.  I want
to do ‘em a kindness, and I can’t do ‘em a kindness unless I know where
they are.  You hear what I say?’

Kit might have returned some answer which would not have been agreeable
to his irascible questioner, if the boy from the wharf, who had been
skulking about the room in search of anything that might have been left
about by accident, had not happened to cry, ‘Here’s a bird!  What’s to
be done with this?’

‘Wring its neck,’ rejoined Quilp.

‘Oh no, don’t do that,’ said Kit, stepping forward.  ‘Give it to me.’

‘Oh yes, I dare say,’ cried the other boy.  ‘Come!  You let the cage
alone, and let me wring its neck will you?  He said I was to do it.
You let the cage alone will you.’

‘Give it here, give it to me, you dogs,’ roared Quilp.  ‘Fight for it,
you dogs, or I’ll wring its neck myself!’

Without further persuasion, the two boys fell upon each other, tooth
and nail, while Quilp, holding up the cage in one hand, and chopping
the ground with his knife in an ecstasy, urged them on by his taunts
and cries to fight more fiercely.  They were a pretty equal match, and
rolled about together, exchanging blows which were by no means child’s
play, until at length Kit, planting a well-directed hit in his
adversary’s chest, disengaged himself, sprung nimbly up, and snatching
the cage from Quilp’s hands made off with his prize.

He did not stop once until he reached home, where his bleeding face
occasioned great consternation, and caused the elder child to howl
dreadfully.

‘Goodness gracious, Kit, what is the matter, what have you been doing?’
cried Mrs Nubbles.

‘Never you mind, mother,’ answered her son, wiping his face on the
jack-towel behind the door.  ‘I’m not hurt, don’t you be afraid for me.
I’ve been a fightin’ for a bird and won him, that’s all.  Hold your
noise, little Jacob.  I never see such a naughty boy in all my days!’

‘You have been fighting for a bird!’ exclaimed his mother.

‘Ah!  Fightin’ for a bird!’ replied Kit, ‘and here he is--Miss Nelly’s
bird, mother, that they was agoin’ to wring the neck of!  I stopped
that though--ha ha ha!  They wouldn’t wring his neck and me by, no, no.
It wouldn’t do, mother, it wouldn’t do at all.  Ha ha ha!’

Kit laughing so heartily, with his swoln and bruised face looking out
of the towel, made little Jacob laugh, and then his mother laughed, and
then the baby crowed and kicked with great glee, and then they all
laughed in concert: partly because of Kit’s triumph, and partly because
they were very fond of each other.  When this fit was over, Kit
exhibited the bird to both children, as a great and precious rarity--it
was only a poor linnet--and looking about the wall for an old nail,
made a scaffolding of a chair and table and twisted it out with great
exultation.

‘Let me see,’ said the boy, ‘I think I’ll hang him in the winder,
because it’s more light and cheerful, and he can see the sky there, if
he looks up very much.  He’s such a one to sing, I can tell you!’

So, the scaffolding was made again, and Kit, climbing up with the poker
for a hammer, knocked in the nail and hung up the cage, to the
immeasurable delight of the whole family.  When it had been adjusted
and straightened a great many times, and he had walked backwards into
the fire-place in his admiration of it, the arrangement was pronounced
to be perfect.

‘And now, mother,’ said the boy, ‘before I rest any more, I’ll go out
and see if I can find a horse to hold, and then I can buy some
birdseed, and a bit of something nice for you, into the bargain.’




CHAPTER 14

As it was very easy for Kit to persuade himself that the old house was
in his way, his way being anywhere, he tried to look upon his passing
it once more as a matter of imperative and disagreeable necessity,
quite apart from any desire of his own, to which he could not choose
but yield.  It is not uncommon for people who are much better fed and
taught than Christopher Nubbles had ever been, to make duties of their
inclinations in matters of more doubtful propriety, and to take great
credit for the self-denial with which they gratify themselves.

There was no need of any caution this time, and no fear of being
detained by having to play out a return match with Daniel Quilp’s boy.
The place was entirely deserted, and looked as dusty and dingy as if it
had been so for months.  A rusty padlock was fastened on the door, ends
of discoloured blinds and curtains flapped drearily against the
half-opened upper windows, and the crooked holes cut in the closed
shutters below, were black with the darkness of the inside.  Some of
the glass in the window he had so often watched, had been broken in the
rough hurry of the morning, and that room looked more deserted and dull
than any.  A group of idle urchins had taken possession of the
door-steps; some were plying the knocker and listening with delighted
dread to the hollow sounds it spread through the dismantled house;
others were clustered about the keyhole, watching half in jest and half
in earnest for ‘the ghost,’ which an hour’s gloom, added to the mystery
that hung about the late inhabitants, had already raised.  Standing all
alone in the midst of the business and bustle of the street, the house
looked a picture of cold desolation; and Kit, who remembered the
cheerful fire that used to burn there on a winter’s night and the no
less cheerful laugh that made the small room ring, turned quite
mournfully away.

It must be especially observed in justice to poor Kit that he was by no
means of a sentimental turn, and perhaps had never heard that adjective
in all his life.  He was only a soft-hearted grateful fellow, and had
nothing genteel or polite about him; consequently, instead of going
home again, in his grief, to kick the children and abuse his mother
(for, when your finely strung people are out of sorts, they must have
everybody else unhappy likewise), he turned his thoughts to the vulgar
expedient of making them more comfortable if he could.

Bless us, what a number of gentlemen on horseback there were riding up
and down, and how few of them wanted their horses held!  A good city
speculator or a parliamentary commissioner could have told to a
fraction, from the crowds that were cantering about, what sum of money
was realised in London, in the course of a year, by holding horses
alone.  And undoubtedly it would have been a very large one, if only a
twentieth part of the gentlemen without grooms had had occasion to
alight; but they had not; and it is often an ill-natured circumstance
like this, which spoils the most ingenious estimate in the world.

Kit walked about, now with quick steps and now with slow; now lingering
as some rider slackened his horse’s pace and looked about him; and now
darting at full speed up a bye-street as he caught a glimpse of some
distant horseman going lazily up the shady side of the road, and
promising to stop, at every door.  But on they all went, one after
another, and there was not a penny stirring.  ‘I wonder,’ thought the
boy, ‘if one of these gentlemen knew there was nothing in the cupboard
at home, whether he’d stop on purpose, and make believe that he wanted
to call somewhere, that I might earn a trifle?’

He was quite tired out with pacing the streets, to say nothing of
repeated disappointments, and was sitting down upon a step to rest,
when there approached towards him a little clattering jingling
four-wheeled chaise, drawn by a little obstinate-looking rough-coated
pony, and driven by a little fat placid-faced old gentleman.  Beside
the little old gentleman sat a little old lady, plump and placid like
himself, and the pony was coming along at his own pace and doing
exactly as he pleased with the whole concern.  If the old gentleman
remonstrated by shaking the reins, the pony replied by shaking his
head.  It was plain that the utmost the pony would consent to do, was
to go in his own way up any street that the old gentleman particularly
wished to traverse, but that it was an understanding between them that
he must do this after his own fashion or not at all.

As they passed where he sat, Kit looked so wistfully at the little
turn-out, that the old gentleman looked at him.  Kit rising and putting
his hand to his hat, the old gentleman intimated to the pony that he
wished to stop, to which proposal the pony (who seldom objected to that
part of his duty) graciously acceded.

‘I beg your pardon, sir,’ said Kit.  ‘I’m sorry you stopped, sir.  I
only meant did you want your horse minded.’

‘I’m going to get down in the next street,’ returned the old gentleman.
‘If you like to come on after us, you may have the job.’

Kit thanked him, and joyfully obeyed.  The pony ran off at a sharp
angle to inspect a lamp-post on the opposite side of the way, and then
went off at a tangent to another lamp-post on the other side.  Having
satisfied himself that they were of the same pattern and materials, he
came to a stop apparently absorbed in meditation.

‘Will you go on, sir,’ said the old gentleman, gravely, ‘or are we to
wait here for you till it’s too late for our appointment?’

The pony remained immoveable.

‘Oh you naughty Whisker,’ said the old lady.  ‘Fie upon you!  I’m
ashamed of such conduct.’

The pony appeared to be touched by this appeal to his feelings, for he
trotted on directly, though in a sulky manner, and stopped no more
until he came to a door whereon was a brass plate with the words
‘Witherden--Notary.’  Here the old gentleman got out and helped out the
old lady, and then took from under the seat a nosegay resembling in
shape and dimensions a full-sized warming-pan with the handle cut short
off.  This, the old lady carried into the house with a staid and
stately air, and the old gentleman (who had a club-foot) followed close
upon her.

They went, as it was easy to tell from the sound of their voices, into
the front parlour, which seemed to be a kind of office.  The day being
very warm and the street a quiet one, the windows were wide open; and
it was easy to hear through the Venetian blinds all that passed inside.

At first there was a great shaking of hands and shuffling of feet,
succeeded by the presentation of the nosegay; for a voice, supposed by
the listener to be that of Mr Witherden the Notary, was heard to
exclaim a great many times, ‘oh, delicious!’ ‘oh, fragrant, indeed!’
and a nose, also supposed to be the property of that gentleman, was
heard to inhale the scent with a snuffle of exceeding pleasure.

‘I brought it in honour of the occasion, Sir,’ said the old lady.

‘Ah! an occasion indeed, ma’am, an occasion which does honour to me,
ma’am, honour to me,’ rejoined Mr Witherden, the notary.  ‘I have had
many a gentleman articled to me, ma’am, many a one.  Some of them are
now rolling in riches, unmindful of their old companion and friend,
ma’am, others are in the habit of calling upon me to this day and
saying, “Mr Witherden, some of the pleasantest hours I ever spent in my
life were spent in this office--were spent, Sir, upon this very stool”;
but there was never one among the number, ma’am, attached as I have
been to many of them, of whom I augured such bright things as I do of
your only son.’

‘Oh dear!’ said the old lady.  ‘How happy you do make us when you tell
us that, to be sure!’

‘I tell you, ma’am,’ said Mr Witherden, ‘what I think as an honest man,
which, as the poet observes, is the noblest work of God.  I agree with
the poet in every particular, ma’am.  The mountainous Alps on the one
hand, or a humming-bird on the other, is nothing, in point of
workmanship, to an honest man--or woman--or woman.’

‘Anything that Mr Witherden can say of me,’ observed a small quiet
voice, ‘I can say, with interest, of him, I am sure.’

‘It’s a happy circumstance, a truly happy circumstance,’ said the
Notary, ‘to happen too upon his eight-and-twentieth birthday, and I
hope I know how to appreciate it.  I trust, Mr Garland, my dear Sir,
that we may mutually congratulate each other upon this auspicious
occasion.’

To this the old gentleman replied that he felt assured they might.
There appeared to be another shaking of hands in consequence, and when
it was over, the old gentleman said that, though he said it who should
not, he believed no son had ever been a greater comfort to his parents
than Abel Garland had been to his.

‘Marrying as his mother and I did, late in life, sir, after waiting for
a great many years, until we were well enough off--coming together when
we were no longer young, and then being blessed with one child who has
always been dutiful and affectionate--why, it’s a source of great
happiness to us both, sir.’

‘Of course it is, I have no doubt of it,’ returned the Notary in a
sympathising voice.  ‘It’s the contemplation of this sort of thing,
that makes me deplore my fate in being a bachelor.  There was a young
lady once, sir, the daughter of an outfitting warehouse of the first
respectability--but that’s a weakness.  Chuckster, bring in Mr Abel’s
articles.’

‘You see, Mr Witherden,’ said the old lady, ‘that Abel has not been
brought up like the run of young men.  He has always had a pleasure in
our society, and always been with us.  Abel has never been absent from
us, for a day; has he, my dear?’

‘Never, my dear,’ returned the old gentleman, ‘except when he went to
Margate one Saturday with Mr Tomkinley that had been a teacher at that
school he went to, and came back upon the Monday; but he was very ill
after that, you remember, my dear; it was quite a dissipation.’

‘He was not used to it, you know,’ said the old lady, ‘and he couldn’t
bear it, that’s the truth.  Besides he had no comfort in being there
without us, and had nobody to talk to or enjoy himself with.’

‘That was it, you know,’ interposed the same small quiet voice that had
spoken once before.  ‘I was quite abroad, mother, quite desolate, and
to think that the sea was between us--oh, I never shall forget what I
felt when I first thought that the sea was between us!’

‘Very natural under the circumstances,’ observed the Notary.  ‘Mr
Abel’s feelings did credit to his nature, and credit to your nature,
ma’am, and his father’s nature, and human nature.  I trace the same
current now, flowing through all his quiet and unobtrusive
proceedings.--I am about to sign my name, you observe, at the foot of
the articles which Mr Chuckster will witness; and placing my finger
upon this blue wafer with the vandyked corners, I am constrained to
remark in a distinct tone of voice--don’t be alarmed, ma’am, it is
merely a form of law--that I deliver this, as my act and deed.  Mr Abel
will place his name against the other wafer, repeating the same
cabalistic words, and the business is over.  Ha ha ha!  You see how
easily these things are done!’

There was a short silence, apparently, while Mr Abel went through the
prescribed form, and then the shaking of hands and shuffling of feet
were renewed, and shortly afterwards there was a clinking of
wine-glasses and a great talkativeness on the part of everybody.  In
about a quarter of an hour Mr Chuckster (with a pen behind his ear and
his face inflamed with wine) appeared at the door, and condescending to
address Kit by the jocose appellation of ‘Young Snob,’ informed him
that the visitors were coming out.

Out they came forthwith; Mr Witherden, who was short, chubby,
fresh-coloured, brisk, and pompous, leading the old lady with extreme
politeness, and the father and son following them, arm in arm.  Mr
Abel, who had a quaint old-fashioned air about him, looked nearly of
the same age as his father, and bore a wonderful resemblance to him in
face and figure, though wanting something of his full, round,
cheerfulness, and substituting in its place a timid reserve.  In all
other respects, in the neatness of the dress, and even in the
club-foot, he and the old gentleman were precisely alike.

Having seen the old lady safely in her seat, and assisted in the
arrangement of her cloak and a small basket which formed an
indispensable portion of her equipage, Mr Abel got into a little box
behind which had evidently been made for his express accommodation, and
smiled at everybody present by turns, beginning with his mother and
ending with the pony.  There was then a great to-do to make the pony
hold up his head that the bearing-rein might be fastened; at last even
this was effected; and the old gentleman, taking his seat and the
reins, put his hand in his pocket to find a sixpence for Kit.

He had no sixpence, neither had the old lady, nor Mr Abel, nor the
Notary, nor Mr Chuckster.  The old gentleman thought a shilling too
much, but there was no shop in the street to get change at, so he gave
it to the boy.

‘There,’ he said jokingly, ‘I’m coming here again next Monday at the
same time, and mind you’re here, my lad, to work it out.’

‘Thank you, Sir,’ said Kit.  ‘I’ll be sure to be here.’

He was quite serious, but they all laughed heartily at his saying so,
especially Mr Chuckster, who roared outright and appeared to relish the
joke amazingly.  As the pony, with a presentiment that he was going
home, or a determination that he would not go anywhere else (which was
the same thing) trotted away pretty nimbly, Kit had no time to justify
himself, and went his way also.  Having expended his treasure in such
purchases as he knew would be most acceptable at home, not forgetting
some seed for the wonderful bird, he hastened back as fast as he could,
so elated with his success and great good fortune, that he more than
half expected Nell and the old man would have arrived before him.




CHAPTER 15

Often, while they were yet pacing the silent streets of the town on the
morning of their departure, the child trembled with a mingled sensation
of hope and fear as in some far-off figure imperfectly seen in the
clear distance, her fancy traced a likeness to honest Kit.  But
although she would gladly have given him her hand and thanked him for
what he had said at their last meeting, it was always a relief to find,
when they came nearer to each other, that the person who approached was
not he, but a stranger; for even if she had not dreaded the effect
which the sight of him might have wrought upon her fellow-traveller,
she felt that to bid farewell to anybody now, and most of all to him
who had been so faithful and so true, was more than she could bear.  It
was enough to leave dumb things behind, and objects that were
insensible both to her love and sorrow.  To have parted from her only
other friend upon the threshold of that wild journey, would have wrung
her heart indeed.

Why is it that we can better bear to part in spirit than in body, and
while we have the fortitude to act farewell have not the nerve to say
it?  On the eve of long voyages or an absence of many years, friends
who are tenderly attached will separate with the usual look, the usual
pressure of the hand, planning one final interview for the morrow,
while each well knows that it is but a poor feint to save the pain of
uttering that one word, and that the meeting will never be.  Should
possibilities be worse to bear than certainties?  We do not shun our
dying friends; the not having distinctly taken leave of one among them,
whom we left in all kindness and affection, will often embitter the
whole remainder of a life.

The town was glad with morning light; places that had shown ugly and
distrustful all night long, now wore a smile; and sparkling sunbeams
dancing on chamber windows, and twinkling through blind and curtain
before sleepers’ eyes, shed light even into dreams, and chased away the
shadows of the night.  Birds in hot rooms, covered up close and dark,
felt it was morning, and chafed and grew restless in their little
cells; bright-eyed mice crept back to their tiny homes and nestled
timidly together; the sleek house-cat, forgetful of her prey, sat
winking at the rays of sun starting through keyhole and cranny in the
door, and longed for her stealthy run and warm sleek bask outside.  The
nobler beasts confined in dens, stood motionless behind their bars and
gazed on fluttering boughs, and sunshine peeping through some little
window, with eyes in which old forests gleamed--then trod impatiently
the track their prisoned feet had worn--and stopped and gazed again.
Men in their dungeons stretched their cramp cold limbs and cursed the
stone that no bright sky could warm.  The flowers that sleep by night,
opened their gentle eyes and turned them to the day.  The light,
creation’s mind, was everywhere, and all things owned its power.

The two pilgrims, often pressing each other’s hands, or exchanging a
smile or cheerful look, pursued their way in silence.  Bright and happy
as it was, there was something solemn in the long, deserted streets,
from which, like bodies without souls, all habitual character and
expression had departed, leaving but one dead uniform repose, that made
them all alike.  All was so still at that early hour, that the few pale
people whom they met seemed as much unsuited to the scene, as the
sickly lamp which had been here and there left burning, was powerless
and faint in the full glory of the sun.

Before they had penetrated very far into the labyrinth of men’s abodes
which yet lay between them and the outskirts, this aspect began to melt
away, and noise and bustle to usurp its place.  Some straggling carts
and coaches rumbling by, first broke the charm, then others came, then
others yet more active, then a crowd.  The wonder was, at first, to see
a tradesman’s window open, but it was a rare thing soon to see one
closed; then, smoke rose slowly from the chimneys, and sashes were
thrown up to let in air, and doors were opened, and servant girls,
looking lazily in all directions but their brooms, scattered brown
clouds of dust into the eyes of shrinking passengers, or listened
disconsolately to milkmen who spoke of country fairs, and told of
waggons in the mews, with awnings and all things complete, and gallant
swains to boot, which another hour would see upon their journey.

This quarter passed, they came upon the haunts of commerce and great
traffic, where many people were resorting, and business was already
rife.  The old man looked about him with a startled and bewildered
gaze, for these were places that he hoped to shun.  He pressed his
finger on his lip, and drew the child along by narrow courts and
winding ways, nor did he seem at ease until they had left it far
behind, often casting a backward look towards it, murmuring that ruin
and self-murder were crouching in every street, and would follow if
they scented them; and that they could not fly too fast.

Again this quarter passed, they came upon a straggling neighbourhood,
where the mean houses parcelled off in rooms, and windows patched with
rags and paper, told of the populous poverty that sheltered there.  The
shops sold goods that only poverty could buy, and sellers and buyers
were pinched and griped alike.  Here were poor streets where faded
gentility essayed with scanty space and shipwrecked means to make its
last feeble stand, but tax-gatherer and creditor came there as
elsewhere, and the poverty that yet faintly struggled was hardly less
squalid and manifest than that which had long ago submitted and given
up the game.

This was a wide, wide track--for the humble followers of the camp of
wealth pitch their tents round about it for many a mile--but its
character was still the same.  Damp rotten houses, many to let, many
yet building, many half-built and mouldering away--lodgings, where it
would be hard to tell which needed pity most, those who let or those
who came to take--children, scantily fed and clothed, spread over every
street, and sprawling in the dust--scolding mothers, stamping their
slipshod feet with noisy threats upon the pavement--shabby fathers,
hurrying with dispirited looks to the occupation which brought them
‘daily bread’ and little more--mangling-women, washer-women, cobblers,
tailors, chandlers, driving their trades in parlours and kitchens and
back room and garrets, and sometimes all of them under the same
roof--brick-fields skirting gardens paled with staves of old casks, or
timber pillaged from houses burnt down, and blackened and blistered by
the flames--mounds of dock-weed, nettles, coarse grass and
oyster-shells, heaped in rank confusion--small dissenting chapels to
teach, with no lack of illustration, the miseries of Earth, and plenty
of new churches, erected with a little superfluous wealth, to show the
way to Heaven.

At length these streets becoming more straggling yet, dwindled and
dwindled away, until there were only small garden patches bordering the
road, with many a summer house innocent of paint and built of old
timber or some fragments of a boat, green as the tough cabbage-stalks
that grew about it, and grottoed at the seams with toad-stools and
tight-sticking snails.  To these succeeded pert cottages, two and two
with plots of ground in front, laid out in angular beds with stiff box
borders and narrow paths between, where footstep never strayed to make
the gravel rough.  Then came the public-house, freshly painted in green
and white, with tea-gardens and a bowling green, spurning its old
neighbour with the horse-trough where the waggons stopped; then,
fields; and then, some houses, one by one, of goodly size with lawns,
some even with a lodge where dwelt a porter and his wife.  Then came a
turnpike; then fields again with trees and hay-stacks; then, a hill,
and on the top of that, the traveller might stop, and--looking back at
old Saint Paul’s looming through the smoke, its cross peeping above the
cloud (if the day were clear), and glittering in the sun; and casting
his eyes upon the Babel out of which it grew until he traced it down to
the furthest outposts of the invading army of bricks and mortar whose
station lay for the present nearly at his feet--might feel at last that
he was clear of London.

Near such a spot as this, and in a pleasant field, the old man and his
little guide (if guide she were, who knew not whither they were bound)
sat down to rest.  She had had the precaution to furnish her basket
with some slices of bread and meat, and here they made their frugal
breakfast.

The freshness of the day, the singing of the birds, the beauty of the
waving grass, the deep green leaves, the wild flowers, and the thousand
exquisite scents and sounds that floated in the air--deep joys to most
of us, but most of all to those whose life is in a crowd or who live
solitarily in great cities as in the bucket of a human well--sunk into
their breasts and made them very glad.  The child had repeated her
artless prayers once that morning, more earnestly perhaps than she had
ever done in all her life, but as she felt all this, they rose to her
lips again.  The old man took off his hat--he had no memory for the
words--but he said amen, and that they were very good.

There had been an old copy of the Pilgrim’s Progress, with strange
plates, upon a shelf at home, over which she had often pored whole
evenings, wondering whether it was true in every word, and where those
distant countries with the curious names might be.  As she looked back
upon the place they had left, one part of it came strongly on her mind.

‘Dear grandfather,’ she said, ‘only that this place is prettier and a
great deal better than the real one, if that in the book is like it, I
feel as if we were both Christian, and laid down on this grass all the
cares and troubles we brought with us; never to take them up again.’

‘No--never to return--never to return’--replied the old man, waving his
hand towards the city.  ‘Thou and I are free of it now, Nell.  They
shall never lure us back.’

‘Are you tired?’ said the child, ‘are you sure you don’t feel ill from
this long walk?’

‘I shall never feel ill again, now that we are once away,’ was his
reply.  ‘Let us be stirring, Nell.  We must be further away--a long,
long way further.  We are too near to stop, and be at rest.  Come!’

There was a pool of clear water in the field, in which the child laved
her hands and face, and cooled her feet before setting forth to walk
again.  She would have the old man refresh himself in this way too, and
making him sit down upon the grass, cast the water on him with her
hands, and dried it with her simple dress.

‘I can do nothing for myself, my darling,’ said the grandfather; ‘I
don’t know how it is, I could once, but the time’s gone.  Don’t leave
me, Nell; say that thou’lt not leave me.  I loved thee all the while,
indeed I did.  If I lose thee too, my dear, I must die!’

He laid his head upon her shoulder and moaned piteously.  The time had
been, and a very few days before, when the child could not have
restrained her tears and must have wept with him.  But now she soothed
him with gentle and tender words, smiled at his thinking they could
ever part, and rallied him cheerfully upon the jest.  He was soon
calmed and fell asleep, singing to himself in a low voice, like a
little child.

He awoke refreshed, and they continued their journey.  The road was
pleasant, lying between beautiful pastures and fields of corn, about
which, poised high in the clear blue sky, the lark trilled out her
happy song.  The air came laden with the fragrance it caught upon its
way, and the bees, upborne upon its scented breath, hummed forth their
drowsy satisfaction as they floated by.

They were now in the open country; the houses were very few and
scattered at long intervals, often miles apart.  Occasionally they came
upon a cluster of poor cottages, some with a chair or low board put
across the open door to keep the scrambling children from the road,
others shut up close while all the family were working in the fields.
These were often the commencement of a little village: and after an
interval came a wheelwright’s shed or perhaps a blacksmith’s forge;
then a thriving farm with sleepy cows lying about the yard, and horses
peering over the low wall and scampering away when harnessed horses
passed upon the road, as though in triumph at their freedom.  There
were dull pigs too, turning up the ground in search of dainty food, and
grunting their monotonous grumblings as they prowled about, or crossed
each other in their quest; plump pigeons skimming round the roof or
strutting on the eaves; and ducks and geese, far more graceful in their
own conceit, waddling awkwardly about the edges of the pond or sailing
glibly on its surface.  The farm-yard passed, then came the little inn;
the humbler beer-shop; and the village tradesman’s; then the lawyer’s
and the parson’s, at whose dread names the beer-shop trembled; the
church then peeped out modestly from a clump of trees; then there were
a few more cottages; then the cage, and pound, and not unfrequently, on
a bank by the way-side, a deep old dusty well.  Then came the
trim-hedged fields on either hand, and the open road again.

They walked all day, and slept that night at a small cottage where beds
were let to travellers.  Next morning they were afoot again, and though
jaded at first, and very tired, recovered before long and proceeded
briskly forward.

They often stopped to rest, but only for a short space at a time, and
still kept on, having had but slight refreshment since the morning.  It
was nearly five o’clock in the afternoon, when drawing near another
cluster of labourers’ huts, the child looked wistfully in each,
doubtful at which to ask for permission to rest awhile, and buy a
draught of milk.

It was not easy to determine, for she was timid and fearful of being
repulsed.  Here was a crying child, and there a noisy wife.  In this,
the people seemed too poor; in that, too many.  At length she stopped
at one where the family were seated round the table--chiefly because
there was an old man sitting in a cushioned chair beside the hearth,
and she thought he was a grandfather and would feel for hers.

There were besides, the cottager and his wife, and three young sturdy
children, brown as berries.  The request was no sooner preferred, than
granted.  The eldest boy ran out to fetch some milk, the second dragged
two stools towards the door, and the youngest crept to his mother’s
gown, and looked at the strangers from beneath his sunburnt hand.

‘God save you, master,’ said the old cottager in a thin piping voice;
‘are you travelling far?’

‘Yes, Sir, a long way’--replied the child; for her grandfather appealed
to her.

‘From London?’ inquired the old man.

The child said yes.

Ah!  He had been in London many a time--used to go there often once,
with waggons.  It was nigh two-and-thirty year since he had been there
last, and he did hear say there were great changes.  Like enough!  He
had changed, himself, since then.  Two-and-thirty year was a long time
and eighty-four a great age, though there was some he had known that
had lived to very hard upon a hundred--and not so hearty as he,
neither--no, nothing like it.

‘Sit thee down, master, in the elbow chair,’ said the old man, knocking
his stick upon the brick floor, and trying to do so sharply.  ‘Take a
pinch out o’ that box; I don’t take much myself, for it comes dear, but
I find it wakes me up sometimes, and ye’re but a boy to me.  I should
have a son pretty nigh as old as you if he’d lived, but they listed him
for a so’ger--he come back home though, for all he had but one poor
leg.  He always said he’d be buried near the sun-dial he used to climb
upon when he was a baby, did my poor boy, and his words come true--you
can see the place with your own eyes; we’ve kept the turf up, ever
since.’

He shook his head, and looking at his daughter with watery eyes, said
she needn’t be afraid that he was going to talk about that, any more.
He didn’t wish to trouble nobody, and if he had troubled anybody by
what he said, he asked pardon, that was all.

The milk arrived, and the child producing her little basket, and
selecting its best fragments for her grandfather, they made a hearty
meal.  The furniture of the room was very homely of course--a few rough
chairs and a table, a corner cupboard with their little stock of
crockery and delf, a gaudy tea-tray, representing a lady in bright red,
walking out with a very blue parasol, a few common, coloured scripture
subjects in frames upon the wall and chimney, an old dwarf
clothes-press and an eight-day clock, with a few bright saucepans and a
kettle, comprised the whole.  But everything was clean and neat, and as
the child glanced round, she felt a tranquil air of comfort and content
to which she had long been unaccustomed.

‘How far is it to any town or village?’ she asked of the husband.

‘A matter of good five mile, my dear,’ was the reply, ‘but you’re not
going on to-night?’

‘Yes, yes, Nell,’ said the old man hastily, urging her too by signs.
‘Further on, further on, darling, further away if we walk till
midnight.’

‘There’s a good barn hard by, master,’ said the man, ‘or there’s
travellers’ lodging, I know, at the Plow an’ Harrer.  Excuse me, but
you do seem a little tired, and unless you’re very anxious to get on--’

‘Yes, yes, we are,’ returned the old man fretfully.  ‘Further away,
dear Nell, pray further away.’

‘We must go on, indeed,’ said the child, yielding to his restless wish.
‘We thank you very much, but we cannot stop so soon.  I’m quite ready,
grandfather.’

But the woman had observed, from the young wanderer’s gait, that one of
her little feet was blistered and sore, and being a woman and a mother
too, she would not suffer her to go until she had washed the place and
applied some simple remedy, which she did so carefully and with such a
gentle hand--rough-grained and hard though it was, with work--that the
child’s heart was too full to admit of her saying more than a fervent
‘God bless you!’ nor could she look back nor trust herself to speak,
until they had left the cottage some distance behind.  When she turned
her head, she saw that the whole family, even the old grandfather, were
standing in the road watching them as they went, and so, with many
waves of the hand, and cheering nods, and on one side at least not
without tears, they parted company.

They trudged forward, more slowly and painfully than they had done yet,
for another mile or thereabouts, when they heard the sound of wheels
behind them, and looking round observed an empty cart approaching
pretty briskly.  The driver on coming up to them stopped his horse and
looked earnestly at Nell.

‘Didn’t you stop to rest at a cottage yonder?’ he said.

‘Yes, sir,’ replied the child.

‘Ah!  They asked me to look out for you,’ said the man.  ‘I’m going
your way.  Give me your hand--jump up, master.’

This was a great relief, for they were very much fatigued and could
scarcely crawl along.  To them the jolting cart was a luxurious
carriage, and the ride the most delicious in the world.  Nell had
scarcely settled herself on a little heap of straw in one corner, when
she fell asleep, for the first time that day.

She was awakened by the stopping of the cart, which was about to turn
up a bye-lane.  The driver kindly got down to help her out, and
pointing to some trees at a very short distance before them, said that
the town lay there, and that they had better take the path which they
would see leading through the churchyard.  Accordingly, towards this
spot, they directed their weary steps.




CHAPTER 16

The sun was setting when they reached the wicket-gate at which the path
began, and, as the rain falls upon the just and unjust alike, it shed
its warm tint even upon the resting-places of the dead, and bade them
be of good hope for its rising on the morrow.  The church was old and
grey, with ivy clinging to the walls, and round the porch.  Shunning
the tombs, it crept about the mounds, beneath which slept poor humble
men: twining for them the first wreaths they had ever won, but wreaths
less liable to wither and far more lasting in their kind, than some
which were graven deep in stone and marble, and told in pompous terms
of virtues meekly hidden for many a year, and only revealed at last to
executors and mourning legatees.

The clergyman’s horse, stumbling with a dull blunt sound among the
graves, was cropping the grass; at once deriving orthodox consolation
from the dead parishioners, and enforcing last Sunday’s text that this
was what all flesh came to; a lean ass who had sought to expound it
also, without being qualified and ordained, was pricking his ears in an
empty pound hard by, and looking with hungry eyes upon his priestly
neighbour.

The old man and the child quitted the gravel path, and strayed among
the tombs; for there the ground was soft, and easy to their tired feet.
As they passed behind the church, they heard voices near at hand, and
presently came on those who had spoken.

They were two men who were seated in easy attitudes upon the grass, and
so busily engaged as to be at first unconscious of intruders.  It was
not difficult to divine that they were of a class of itinerant
showmen--exhibitors of the freaks of Punch--for, perched cross-legged
upon a tombstone behind them, was a figure of that hero himself, his
nose and chin as hooked and his face as beaming as usual.  Perhaps his
imperturbable character was never more strikingly developed, for he
preserved his usual equable smile notwithstanding that his body was
dangling in a most uncomfortable position, all loose and limp and
shapeless, while his long peaked cap, unequally balanced against his
exceedingly slight legs, threatened every instant to bring him toppling
down.

In part scattered upon the ground at the feet of the two men, and in
part jumbled together in a long flat box, were the other persons of the
Drama.  The hero’s wife and one child, the hobby-horse, the doctor, the
foreign gentleman who not being familiar with the language is unable in
the representation to express his ideas otherwise than by the utterance
of the word ‘Shallabalah’ three distinct times, the radical neighbour
who will by no means admit that a tin bell is an organ, the
executioner, and the devil, were all here.  Their owners had evidently
come to that spot to make some needful repairs in the stage
arrangements, for one of them was engaged in binding together a small
gallows with thread, while the other was intent upon fixing a new black
wig, with the aid of a small hammer and some tacks, upon the head of
the radical neighbour, who had been beaten bald.

They raised their eyes when the old man and his young companion were
close upon them, and pausing in their work, returned their looks of
curiosity.  One of them, the actual exhibitor no doubt, was a little
merry-faced man with a twinkling eye and a red nose, who seemed to have
unconsciously imbibed something of his hero’s character.  The
other--that was he who took the money--had rather a careful and
cautious look, which was perhaps inseparable from his occupation also.

The merry man was the first to greet the strangers with a nod; and
following the old man’s eyes, he observed that perhaps that was the
first time he had ever seen a Punch off the stage.  (Punch, it may be
remarked, seemed to be pointing with the tip of his cap to a most
flourishing epitaph, and to be chuckling over it with all his heart.)

‘Why do you come here to do this?’ said the old man, sitting down
beside them, and looking at the figures with extreme delight.

‘Why you see,’ rejoined the little man, ‘we’re putting up for to-night
at the public-house yonder, and it wouldn’t do to let ‘em see the
present company undergoing repair.’

‘No!’ cried the old man, making signs to Nell to listen, ‘why not, eh?
why not?’

‘Because it would destroy all the delusion, and take away all the
interest, wouldn’t it?’ replied the little man.  ‘Would you care a
ha’penny for the Lord Chancellor if you know’d him in private and
without his wig?--certainly not.’

‘Good!’ said the old man, venturing to touch one of the puppets, and
drawing away his hand with a shrill laugh.  ‘Are you going to show ‘em
to-night?  are you?’

‘That is the intention, governor,’ replied the other, ‘and unless I’m
much mistaken, Tommy Codlin is a calculating at this minute what we’ve
lost through your coming upon us.  Cheer up, Tommy, it can’t be much.’

The little man accompanied these latter words with a wink, expressive
of the estimate he had formed of the travellers’ finances.

To this Mr Codlin, who had a surly, grumbling manner, replied, as he
twitched Punch off the tombstone and flung him into the box, ‘I don’t
care if we haven’t lost a farden, but you’re too free.  If you stood in
front of the curtain and see the public’s faces as I do, you’d know
human natur’ better.’

‘Ah! it’s been the spoiling of you, Tommy, your taking to that branch,’
rejoined his companion.  ‘When you played the ghost in the reg’lar
drama in the fairs, you believed in everything--except ghosts.  But now
you’re a universal mistruster.  I never see a man so changed.’

‘Never mind,’ said Mr Codlin, with the air of a discontented
philosopher.  ‘I know better now, and p’raps I’m sorry for it.’

Turning over the figures in the box like one who knew and despised
them, Mr Codlin drew one forth and held it up for the inspection of his
friend:

‘Look here; here’s all this judy’s clothes falling to pieces again.
You haven’t got a needle and thread I suppose?’

The little man shook his head, and scratched it ruefully as he
contemplated this severe indisposition of a principal performer.
Seeing that they were at a loss, the child said timidly:

‘I have a needle, Sir, in my basket, and thread too.  Will you let me
try to mend it for you?  I think I could do it neater than you could.’

Even Mr Codlin had nothing to urge against a proposal so seasonable.
Nelly, kneeling down beside the box, was soon busily engaged in her
task, and accomplishing it to a miracle.

While she was thus engaged, the merry little man looked at her with an
interest which did not appear to be diminished when he glanced at her
helpless companion.  When she had finished her work he thanked her, and
inquired whither they were travelling.

‘N--no further to-night, I think,’ said the child, looking towards her
grandfather.

‘If you’re wanting a place to stop at,’ the man remarked, ‘I should
advise you to take up at the same house with us.  That’s it.  The long,
low, white house there.  It’s very cheap.’

The old man, notwithstanding his fatigue, would have remained in the
churchyard all night if his new acquaintances had remained there too.
As he yielded to this suggestion a ready and rapturous assent, they all
rose and walked away together; he keeping close to the box of puppets
in which he was quite absorbed, the merry little man carrying it slung
over his arm by a strap attached to it for the purpose, Nelly having
hold of her grandfather’s hand, and Mr Codlin sauntering slowly behind,
casting up at the church tower and neighbouring trees such looks as he
was accustomed in town-practice to direct to drawing-room and nursery
windows, when seeking for a profitable spot on which to plant the show.

The public-house was kept by a fat old landlord and landlady who made
no objection to receiving their new guests, but praised Nelly’s beauty
and were at once prepossessed in her behalf.  There was no other
company in the kitchen but the two showmen, and the child felt very
thankful that they had fallen upon such good quarters.  The landlady
was very much astonished to learn that they had come all the way from
London, and appeared to have no little curiosity touching their farther
destination.  The child parried her inquiries as well as she could, and
with no great trouble, for finding that they appeared to give her pain,
the old lady desisted.

‘These two gentlemen have ordered supper in an hour’s time,’ she said,
taking her into the bar; ‘and your best plan will be to sup with them.
Meanwhile you shall have a little taste of something that’ll do you
good, for I’m sure you must want it after all you’ve gone through
to-day.  Now, don’t look after the old gentleman, because when you’ve
drank that, he shall have some too.’

As nothing could induce the child to leave him alone, however, or to
touch anything in which he was not the first and greatest sharer, the
old lady was obliged to help him first.  When they had been thus
refreshed, the whole house hurried away into an empty stable where the
show stood, and where, by the light of a few flaring candles stuck
round a hoop which hung by a line from the ceiling, it was to be
forthwith exhibited.

And now Mr Thomas Codlin, the misanthrope, after blowing away at the
Pan’s pipes until he was intensely wretched, took his station on one
side of the checked drapery which concealed the mover of the figures,
and putting his hands in his pockets prepared to reply to all questions
and remarks of Punch, and to make a dismal feint of being his most
intimate private friend, of believing in him to the fullest and most
unlimited extent, of knowing that he enjoyed day and night a merry and
glorious existence in that temple, and that he was at all times and
under every circumstance the same intelligent and joyful person that
the spectators then beheld him.  All this Mr Codlin did with the air of
a man who had made up his mind for the worst and was quite resigned;
his eye slowly wandering about during the briskest repartee to observe
the effect upon the audience, and particularly the impression made upon
the landlord and landlady, which might be productive of very important
results in connexion with the supper.

Upon this head, however, he had no cause for any anxiety, for the whole
performance was applauded to the echo, and voluntary contributions were
showered in with a liberality which testified yet more strongly to the
general delight.  Among the laughter none was more loud and frequent
than the old man’s.  Nell’s was unheard, for she, poor child, with her
head drooping on his shoulder, had fallen asleep, and slept too soundly
to be roused by any of his efforts to awaken her to a participation in
his glee.

The supper was very good, but she was too tired to eat, and yet would
not leave the old man until she had kissed him in his bed.  He, happily
insensible to every care and anxiety, sat listening with a vacant smile
and admiring face to all that his new friend said; and it was not until
they retired yawning to their room, that he followed the child up
stairs.

It was but a loft partitioned into two compartments, where they were to
rest, but they were well pleased with their lodging and had hoped for
none so good.  The old man was uneasy when he had lain down, and begged
that Nell would come and sit at his bedside as she had done for so many
nights.  She hastened to him, and sat there till he slept.

There was a little window, hardly more than a chink in the wall, in her
room, and when she left him, she opened it, quite wondering at the
silence.  The sight of the old church, and the graves about it in the
moonlight, and the dark trees whispering among themselves, made her
more thoughtful than before.  She closed the window again, and sitting
down upon the bed, thought of the life that was before them.

She had a little money, but it was very little, and when that was gone,
they must begin to beg.  There was one piece of gold among it, and an
emergency might come when its worth to them would be increased a
hundred fold.  It would be best to hide this coin, and never produce it
unless their case was absolutely desperate, and no other resource was
left them.

Her resolution taken, she sewed the piece of gold into her dress, and
going to bed with a lighter heart sunk into a deep slumber.




CHAPTER 17

Another bright day shining in through the small casement, and claiming
fellowship with the kindred eyes of the child, awoke her.  At sight of
the strange room and its unaccustomed objects she started up in alarm,
wondering how she had been moved from the familiar chamber in which she
seemed to have fallen asleep last night, and whither she had been
conveyed.  But, another glance around called to her mind all that had
lately passed, and she sprung from her bed, hoping and trustful.

It was yet early, and the old man being still asleep, she walked out
into the churchyard, brushing the dew from the long grass with her
feet, and often turning aside into places where it grew longer than in
others, that she might not tread upon the graves.  She felt a curious
kind of pleasure in lingering among these houses of the dead, and read
the inscriptions on the tombs of the good people (a great number of
good people were buried there), passing on from one to another with
increasing interest.

It was a very quiet place, as such a place should be, save for the
cawing of the rooks who had built their nests among the branches of
some tall old trees, and were calling to one another, high up in the
air.  First, one sleek bird, hovering near his ragged house as it swung
and dangled in the wind, uttered his hoarse cry, quite by chance as it
would seem, and in a sober tone as though he were but talking to
himself.  Another answered, and he called again, but louder than
before; then another spoke and then another; and each time the first,
aggravated by contradiction, insisted on his case more strongly.  Other
voices, silent till now, struck in from boughs lower down and higher up
and midway, and to the right and left, and from the tree-tops; and
others, arriving hastily from the grey church turrets and old belfry
window, joined the clamour which rose and fell, and swelled and dropped
again, and still went on; and all this noisy contention amidst a
skimming to and fro, and lighting on fresh branches, and frequent
change of place, which satirised the old restlessness of those who lay
so still beneath the moss and turf below, and the strife in which they
had worn away their lives.

Frequently raising her eyes to the trees whence these sounds came down,
and feeling as though they made the place more quiet than perfect
silence would have done, the child loitered from grave to grave, now
stopping to replace with careful hands the bramble which had started
from some green mound it helped to keep in shape, and now peeping
through one of the low latticed windows into the church, with its
worm-eaten books upon the desks, and baize of whitened-green mouldering
from the pew sides and leaving the naked wood to view.  There were the
seats where the poor old people sat, worn spare, and yellow like
themselves; the rugged font where children had their names, the homely
altar where they knelt in after life, the plain black tressels that
bore their weight on their last visit to the cool old shady church.
Everything told of long use and quiet slow decay; the very bell-rope in
the porch was frayed into a fringe, and hoary with old age.

She was looking at a humble stone which told of a young man who had
died at twenty-three years old, fifty-five years ago, when she heard a
faltering step approaching, and looking round saw a feeble woman bent
with the weight of years, who tottered to the foot of that same grave
and asked her to read the writing on the stone.  The old woman thanked
her when she had done, saying that she had had the words by heart for
many a long, long year, but could not see them now.

‘Were you his mother?’ said the child.

‘I was his wife, my dear.’

She the wife of a young man of three-and-twenty!  Ah, true!  It was
fifty-five years ago.

‘You wonder to hear me say that,’ remarked the old woman, shaking her
head.  ‘You’re not the first.  Older folk than you have wondered at the
same thing before now.  Yes, I was his wife.  Death doesn’t change us
more than life, my dear.’

‘Do you come here often?’ asked the child.

‘I sit here very often in the summer time,’ she answered, ‘I used to
come here once to cry and mourn, but that was a weary while ago, bless
God!’

‘I pluck the daisies as they grow, and take them home,’ said the old
woman after a short silence.  ‘I like no flowers so well as these, and
haven’t for five-and-fifty years.  It’s a long time, and I’m getting
very old.’

Then growing garrulous upon a theme which was new to one listener
though it were but a child, she told her how she had wept and moaned
and prayed to die herself, when this happened; and how when she first
came to that place, a young creature strong in love and grief, she had
hoped that her heart was breaking as it seemed to be.  But that time
passed by, and although she continued to be sad when she came there,
still she could bear to come, and so went on until it was pain no
longer, but a solemn pleasure, and a duty she had learned to like.  And
now that five-and-fifty years were gone, she spoke of the dead man as
if he had been her son or grandson, with a kind of pity for his youth,
growing out of her own old age, and an exalting of his strength and
manly beauty as compared with her own weakness and decay; and yet she
spoke about him as her husband too, and thinking of herself in
connexion with him, as she used to be and not as she was now, talked of
their meeting in another world, as if he were dead but yesterday, and
she, separated from her former self, were thinking of the happiness of
that comely girl who seemed to have died with him.

The child left her gathering the flowers that grew upon the grave, and
thoughtfully retraced her steps.

The old man was by this time up and dressed.  Mr Codlin, still doomed
to contemplate the harsh realities of existence, was packing among his
linen the candle-ends which had been saved from the previous night’s
performance; while his companion received the compliments of all the
loungers in the stable-yard, who, unable to separate him from the
master-mind of Punch, set him down as next in importance to that merry
outlaw, and loved him scarcely less.  When he had sufficiently
acknowledged his popularity he came in to breakfast, at which meal they
all sat down together.

‘And where are you going to-day?’ said the little man, addressing
himself to Nell.

‘Indeed I hardly know--we have not determined yet,’ replied the child.

‘We’re going on to the races,’ said the little man.  ‘If that’s your
way and you like to have us for company, let us travel together.  If
you prefer going alone, only say the word and you’ll find that we
shan’t trouble you.’

‘We’ll go with you,’ said the old man.  ‘Nell--with them, with them.’

The child considered for a moment, and reflecting that she must shortly
beg, and could scarcely hope to do so at a better place than where
crowds of rich ladies and gentlemen were assembled together for
purposes of enjoyment and festivity, determined to accompany these men
so far.  She therefore thanked the little man for his offer, and said,
glancing timidly towards his friend, that if there was no objection to
their accompanying them as far as the race town--

‘Objection!’ said the little man.  ‘Now be gracious for once, Tommy,
and say that you’d rather they went with us.  I know you would.  Be
gracious, Tommy.’

‘Trotters,’ said Mr Codlin, who talked very slowly and ate very
greedily, as is not uncommon with philosophers and misanthropes;
‘you’re too free.’

‘Why what harm can it do?’ urged the other.

‘No harm at all in this particular case, perhaps,’ replied Mr Codlin;
‘but the principle’s a dangerous one, and you’re too free I tell you.’

‘Well, are they to go with us or not?’

‘Yes, they are,’ said Mr Codlin; ‘but you might have made a favour of
it, mightn’t you?’

The real name of the little man was Harris, but it had gradually merged
into the less euphonious one of Trotters, which, with the prefatory
adjective, Short, had been conferred upon him by reason of the small
size of his legs.  Short Trotters however, being a compound name,
inconvenient of use in friendly dialogue, the gentleman on whom it had
been bestowed was known among his intimates either as ‘Short,’ or
‘Trotters,’ and was seldom accosted at full length as Short Trotters,
except in formal conversations and on occasions of ceremony.

Short, then, or Trotters, as the reader pleases, returned unto the
remonstrance of his friend Mr Thomas Codlin a jocose answer calculated
to turn aside his discontent; and applying himself with great relish to
the cold boiled beef, the tea, and bread and butter, strongly impressed
upon his companions that they should do the like.  Mr Codlin indeed
required no such persuasion, as he had already eaten as much as he
could possibly carry and was now moistening his clay with strong ale,
whereof he took deep draughts with a silent relish and invited nobody
to partake--thus again strongly indicating his misanthropical turn of
mind.

Breakfast being at length over, Mr Codlin called the bill, and charging
the ale to the company generally (a practice also savouring of
misanthropy) divided the sum-total into two fair and equal parts,
assigning one moiety to himself and friend, and the other to Nelly and
her grandfather.  These being duly discharged and all things ready for
their departure, they took farewell of the landlord and landlady and
resumed their journey.

And here Mr Codlin’s false position in society and the effect it
wrought upon his wounded spirit, were strongly illustrated; for whereas
he had been last night accosted by Mr Punch as ‘master,’ and had by
inference left the audience to understand that he maintained that
individual for his own luxurious entertainment and delight, here he
was, now, painfully walking beneath the burden of that same Punch’s
temple, and bearing it bodily upon his shoulders on a sultry day and
along a dusty road.  In place of enlivening his patron with a constant
fire of wit or the cheerful rattle of his quarter-staff on the heads of
his relations and acquaintance, here was that beaming Punch utterly
devoid of spine, all slack and drooping in a dark box, with his legs
doubled up round his neck, and not one of his social qualities
remaining.

Mr Codlin trudged heavily on, exchanging a word or two at intervals
with Short, and stopping to rest and growl occasionally.  Short led the
way; with the flat box, the private luggage (which was not extensive)
tied up in a bundle, and a brazen trumpet slung from his
shoulder-blade.  Nell and her grandfather walked next him on either
hand, and Thomas Codlin brought up the rear.

When they came to any town or village, or even to a detached house of
good appearance, Short blew a blast upon the brazen trumpet and
carolled a fragment of a song in that hilarious tone common to Punches
and their consorts.  If people hurried to the windows, Mr Codlin
pitched the temple, and hastily unfurling the drapery and concealing
Short therewith, flourished hysterically on the pipes and performed an
air.  Then the entertainment began as soon as might be; Mr Codlin
having the responsibility of deciding on its length and of protracting
or expediting the time for the hero’s final triumph over the enemy of
mankind, according as he judged that the after-crop of half-pence would
be plentiful or scant.  When it had been gathered in to the last
farthing, he resumed his load and on they went again.

Sometimes they played out the toll across a bridge or ferry, and once
exhibited by particular desire at a turnpike, where the collector,
being drunk in his solitude, paid down a shilling to have it to
himself.  There was one small place of rich promise in which their
hopes were blighted, for a favourite character in the play having
gold-lace upon his coat and being a meddling wooden-headed fellow was
held to be a libel on the beadle, for which reason the authorities
enforced a quick retreat; but they were generally well received, and
seldom left a town without a troop of ragged children shouting at their
heels.

They made a long day’s journey, despite these interruptions, and were
yet upon the road when the moon was shining in the sky.  Short beguiled
the time with songs and jests, and made the best of everything that
happened.  Mr Codlin on the other hand, cursed his fate, and all the
hollow things of earth (but Punch especially), and limped along with
the theatre on his back, a prey to the bitterest chagrin.

They had stopped to rest beneath a finger-post where four roads met,
and Mr Codlin in his deep misanthropy had let down the drapery and
seated himself in the bottom of the show, invisible to mortal eyes and
disdainful of the company of his fellow creatures, when two monstrous
shadows were seen stalking towards them from a turning in the road by
which they had come.  The child was at first quite terrified by the
sight of these gaunt giants--for such they looked as they advanced with
lofty strides beneath the shadow of the trees--but Short, telling her
there was nothing to fear, blew a blast upon the trumpet, which was
answered by a cheerful shout.

‘It’s Grinder’s lot, an’t it?’ cried Mr Short in a loud key.

‘Yes,’ replied a couple of shrill voices.

‘Come on then,’ said Short.  ‘Let’s have a look at you.  I thought it
was you.’

Thus invited, ‘Grinder’s lot’ approached with redoubled speed and soon
came up with the little party.

Mr Grinder’s company, familiarly termed a lot, consisted of a young
gentleman and a young lady on stilts, and Mr Grinder himself, who used
his natural legs for pedestrian purposes and carried at his back a
drum.  The public costume of the young people was of the Highland kind,
but the night being damp and cold, the young gentleman wore over his
kilt a man’s pea jacket reaching to his ankles, and a glazed hat; the
young lady too was muffled in an old cloth pelisse and had a
handkerchief tied about her head.  Their Scotch bonnets, ornamented
with plumes of jet black feathers, Mr Grinder carried on his instrument.

‘Bound for the races, I see,’ said Mr Grinder coming up out of breath.
‘So are we.  How are you, Short?’  With that they shook hands in a very
friendly manner.  The young people being too high up for the ordinary
salutations, saluted Short after their own fashion.  The young
gentleman twisted up his right stilt and patted him on the shoulder,
and the young lady rattled her tambourine.

‘Practice?’ said Short, pointing to the stilts.

‘No,’ returned Grinder.  ‘It comes either to walkin’ in ‘em or carryin’
of ‘em, and they like walkin’ in ‘em best.  It’s wery pleasant for the
prospects.  Which road are you takin’?  We go the nighest.’

‘Why, the fact is,’ said Short, ‘that we are going the longest way,
because then we could stop for the night, a mile and a half on.  But
three or four mile gained to-night is so many saved to-morrow, and if
you keep on, I think our best way is to do the same.’

‘Where’s your partner?’ inquired Grinder.

‘Here he is,’ cried Mr Thomas Codlin, presenting his head and face in
the proscenium of the stage, and exhibiting an expression of
countenance not often seen there; ‘and he’ll see his partner boiled
alive before he’ll go on to-night.  That’s what he says.’

‘Well, don’t say such things as them, in a spear which is dewoted to
something pleasanter,’ urged Short.  ‘Respect associations, Tommy, even
if you do cut up rough.’

‘Rough or smooth,’ said Mr Codlin, beating his hand on the little
footboard where Punch, when suddenly struck with the symmetry of his
legs and their capacity for silk stockings, is accustomed to exhibit
them to popular admiration, ‘rough or smooth, I won’t go further than
the mile and a half to-night.  I put up at the Jolly Sandboys and
nowhere else.  If you like to come there, come there.  If you like to
go on by yourself, go on by yourself, and do without me if you can.’

So saying, Mr Codlin disappeared from the scene and immediately
presented himself outside the theatre, took it on his shoulders at a
jerk, and made off with most remarkable agility.

Any further controversy being now out of the question, Short was fain
to part with Mr Grinder and his pupils and to follow his morose
companion.  After lingering at the finger-post for a few minutes to see
the stilts frisking away in the moonlight and the bearer of the drum
toiling slowly after them, he blew a few notes upon the trumpet as a
parting salute, and hastened with all speed to follow Mr Codlin.  With
this view he gave his unoccupied hand to Nell, and bidding her be of
good cheer as they would soon be at the end of their journey for that
night, and stimulating the old man with a similar assurance, led them
at a pretty swift pace towards their destination, which he was the less
unwilling to make for, as the moon was now overcast and the clouds were
threatening rain.




CHAPTER 18

The Jolly Sandboys was a small road-side inn of pretty ancient date,
with a sign, representing three Sandboys increasing their jollity with
as many jugs of ale and bags of gold, creaking and swinging on its post
on the opposite side of the road.  As the travellers had observed that
day many indications of their drawing nearer and nearer to the race
town, such as gipsy camps, carts laden with gambling booths and their
appurtenances, itinerant showmen of various kinds, and beggars and
trampers of every degree, all wending their way in the same direction,
Mr Codlin was fearful of finding the accommodations forestalled; this
fear increasing as he diminished the distance between himself and the
hostelry, he quickened his pace, and notwithstanding the burden he had
to carry, maintained a round trot until he reached the threshold.  Here
he had the gratification of finding that his fears were without
foundation, for the landlord was leaning against the door-post looking
lazily at the rain, which had by this time begun to descend heavily,
and no tinkling of cracked bell, nor boisterous shout, nor noisy
chorus, gave note of company within.

‘All alone?’ said Mr Codlin, putting down his burden and wiping his
forehead.

‘All alone as yet,’ rejoined the landlord, glancing at the sky, ‘but we
shall have more company to-night I expect.  Here one of you boys, carry
that show into the barn.  Make haste in out of the wet, Tom; when it
came on to rain I told ‘em to make the fire up, and there’s a glorious
blaze in the kitchen, I can tell you.’

Mr Codlin followed with a willing mind, and soon found that the
landlord had not commended his preparations without good reason.  A
mighty fire was blazing on the hearth and roaring up the wide chimney
with a cheerful sound, which a large iron cauldron, bubbling and
simmering in the heat, lent its pleasant aid to swell.  There was a
deep red ruddy blush upon the room, and when the landlord stirred the
fire, sending the flames skipping and leaping up--when he took off the
lid of the iron pot and there rushed out a savoury smell, while the
bubbling sound grew deeper and more rich, and an unctuous steam came
floating out, hanging in a delicious mist above their heads--when he
did this, Mr Codlin’s heart was touched.  He sat down in the
chimney-corner and smiled.

Mr Codlin sat smiling in the chimney-corner, eyeing the landlord as
with a roguish look he held the cover in his hand, and, feigning that
his doing so was needful to the welfare of the cookery, suffered the
delightful steam to tickle the nostrils of his guest.  The glow of the
fire was upon the landlord’s bald head, and upon his twinkling eye, and
upon his watering mouth, and upon his pimpled face, and upon his round
fat figure.  Mr Codlin drew his sleeve across his lips, and said in a
murmuring voice, ‘What is it?’

‘It’s a stew of tripe,’ said the landlord smacking his lips, ‘and
cow-heel,’ smacking them again, ‘and bacon,’ smacking them once more,
‘and steak,’ smacking them for the fourth time, ‘and peas,
cauliflowers, new potatoes, and sparrow-grass, all working up together
in one delicious gravy.’  Having come to the climax, he smacked his
lips a great many times, and taking a long hearty sniff of the
fragrance that was hovering about, put on the cover again with the air
of one whose toils on earth were over.

‘At what time will it be ready?’ asked Mr Codlin faintly.

‘It’ll be done to a turn,’ said the landlord looking up to the
clock--and the very clock had a colour in its fat white face, and
looked a clock for jolly Sandboys to consult--‘it’ll be done to a turn
at twenty-two minutes before eleven.’

‘Then,’ said Mr Codlin, ‘fetch me a pint of warm ale, and don’t let
nobody bring into the room even so much as a biscuit till the time
arrives.’

Nodding his approval of this decisive and manly course of procedure,
the landlord retired to draw the beer, and presently returning with it,
applied himself to warm the same in a small tin vessel shaped
funnel-wise, for the convenience of sticking it far down in the fire
and getting at the bright places.  This was soon done, and he handed it
over to Mr Codlin with that creamy froth upon the surface which is one
of the happy circumstances attendant on mulled malt.

Greatly softened by this soothing beverage, Mr Codlin now bethought him
of his companions, and acquainted mine host of the Sandboys that their
arrival might be shortly looked for.  The rain was rattling against the
windows and pouring down in torrents, and such was Mr Codlin’s extreme
amiability of mind, that he more than once expressed his earnest hope
that they would not be so foolish as to get wet.

At length they arrived, drenched with the rain and presenting a most
miserable appearance, notwithstanding that Short had sheltered the
child as well as he could under the skirts of his own coat, and they
were nearly breathless from the haste they had made.  But their steps
were no sooner heard upon the road than the landlord, who had been at
the outer door anxiously watching for their coming, rushed into the
kitchen and took the cover off.  The effect was electrical.  They all
came in with smiling faces though the wet was dripping from their
clothes upon the floor, and Short’s first remark was, ‘What a delicious
smell!’

It is not very difficult to forget rain and mud by the side of a
cheerful fire, and in a bright room.  They were furnished with slippers
and such dry garments as the house or their own bundles afforded, and
ensconcing themselves, as Mr Codlin had already done, in the warm
chimney-corner, soon forgot their late troubles or only remembered them
as enhancing the delights of the present time.  Overpowered by the
warmth and comfort and the fatigue they had undergone, Nelly and the
old man had not long taken their seats here, when they fell asleep.

‘Who are they?’ whispered the landlord.

Short shook his head, and wished he knew himself.

‘Don’t you know?’ asked the host, turning to Mr Codlin.

‘Not I,’ he replied.  ‘They’re no good, I suppose.’

‘They’re no harm,’ said Short.  ‘Depend upon that.  I tell you
what--it’s plain that the old man an’t in his right mind--’

‘If you haven’t got anything newer than that to say,’ growled Mr
Codlin, glancing at the clock, ‘you’d better let us fix our minds upon
the supper, and not disturb us.’

‘Hear me out, won’t you?’ retorted his friend.  ‘It’s very plain to me,
besides, that they’re not used to this way of life.  Don’t tell me that
that handsome child has been in the habit of prowling about as she’s
done these last two or three days.  I know better.’

‘Well, who DOES tell you she has?’ growled Mr Codlin, again glancing at
the clock and from it to the cauldron, ‘can’t you think of anything
more suitable to present circumstances than saying things and then
contradicting ‘em?’

‘I wish somebody would give you your supper,’ returned Short, ‘for
there’ll be no peace till you’ve got it.  Have you seen how anxious the
old man is to get on--always wanting to be furder away--furder away.
Have you seen that?’

‘Ah! what then?’ muttered Thomas Codlin.

‘This, then,’ said Short.  ‘He has given his friends the slip.  Mind
what I say--he has given his friends the slip, and persuaded this
delicate young creetur all along of her fondness for him to be his
guide and travelling companion--where to, he knows no more than the man
in the moon.  Now I’m not a going to stand that.’

‘YOU’RE not a going to stand that!’ cried Mr Codlin, glancing at the
clock again and pulling his hair with both hands in a kind of frenzy,
but whether occasioned by his companion’s observation or the tardy pace
of Time, it was difficult to determine.  ‘Here’s a world to live in!’

‘I,’ repeated Short emphatically and slowly, ‘am not a-going to stand
it.  I am not a-going to see this fair young child a falling into bad
hands, and getting among people that she’s no more fit for, than they
are to get among angels as their ordinary chums.  Therefore when they
dewelope an intention of parting company from us, I shall take measures
for detaining of ‘em, and restoring ‘em to their friends, who I dare
say have had their disconsolation pasted up on every wall in London by
this time.’

‘Short,’ said Mr Codlin, who with his head upon his hands, and his
elbows on his knees, had been shaking himself impatiently from side to
side up to this point and occasionally stamping on the ground, but who
now looked up with eager eyes; ‘it’s possible that there may be
uncommon good sense in what you’ve said.  If there is, and there should
be a reward, Short, remember that we’re partners in everything!’

His companion had only time to nod a brief assent to this position, for
the child awoke at the instant.  They had drawn close together during
the previous whispering, and now hastily separated and were rather
awkwardly endeavouring to exchange some casual remarks in their usual
tone, when strange footsteps were heard without, and fresh company
entered.

These were no other than four very dismal dogs, who came pattering in
one after the other, headed by an old bandy dog of particularly
mournful aspect, who, stopping when the last of his followers had got
as far as the door, erected himself upon his hind legs and looked round
at his companions, who immediately stood upon their hind legs, in a
grave and melancholy row.  Nor was this the only remarkable
circumstance about these dogs, for each of them wore a kind of little
coat of some gaudy colour trimmed with tarnished spangles, and one of
them had a cap upon his head, tied very carefully under his chin, which
had fallen down upon his nose and completely obscured one eye; add to
this, that the gaudy coats were all wet through and discoloured with
rain, and that the wearers were splashed and dirty, and some idea may
be formed of the unusual appearance of these new visitors to the Jolly
Sandboys.

Neither Short nor the landlord nor Thomas Codlin, however, was in the
least surprised, merely remarking that these were Jerry’s dogs and that
Jerry could not be far behind.  So there the dogs stood, patiently
winking and gaping and looking extremely hard at the boiling pot, until
Jerry himself appeared, when they all dropped down at once and walked
about the room in their natural manner.  This posture it must be
confessed did not much improve their appearance, as their own personal
tails and their coat tails--both capital things in their way--did not
agree together.

Jerry, the manager of these dancing dogs, was a tall black-whiskered
man in a velveteen coat, who seemed well known to the landlord and his
guests and accosted them with great cordiality.  Disencumbering himself
of a barrel organ which he placed upon a chair, and retaining in his
hand a small whip wherewith to awe his company of comedians, he came up
to the fire to dry himself, and entered into conversation.

‘Your people don’t usually travel in character, do they?’ said Short,
pointing to the dresses of the dogs.  ‘It must come expensive if they
do?’

‘No,’ replied Jerry, ‘no, it’s not the custom with us.  But we’ve been
playing a little on the road to-day, and we come out with a new
wardrobe at the races, so I didn’t think it worth while to stop to
undress.  Down, Pedro!’

This was addressed to the dog with the cap on, who being a new member
of the company, and not quite certain of his duty, kept his unobscured
eye anxiously on his master, and was perpetually starting upon his hind
legs when there was no occasion, and falling down again.

‘I’ve got a animal here,’ said Jerry, putting his hand into the
capacious pocket of his coat, and diving into one corner as if he were
feeling for a small orange or an apple or some such article, ‘a animal
here, wot I think you know something of, Short.’

‘Ah!’ cried Short, ‘let’s have a look at him.’

‘Here he is,’ said Jerry, producing a little terrier from his pocket.
‘He was once a Toby of yours, warn’t he!’

In some versions of the great drama of Punch there is a small dog--a
modern innovation--supposed to be the private property of that
gentleman, whose name is always Toby.  This Toby has been stolen in
youth from another gentleman, and fraudulently sold to the confiding
hero, who having no guile himself has no suspicion that it lurks in
others; but Toby, entertaining a grateful recollection of his old
master, and scorning to attach himself to any new patrons, not only
refuses to smoke a pipe at the bidding of Punch, but to mark his old
fidelity more strongly, seizes him by the nose and wrings the same with
violence, at which instance of canine attachment the spectators are
deeply affected.  This was the character which the little terrier in
question had once sustained; if there had been any doubt upon the
subject he would speedily have resolved it by his conduct; for not only
did he, on seeing Short, give the strongest tokens of recognition, but
catching sight of the flat box he barked so furiously at the pasteboard
nose which he knew was inside, that his master was obliged to gather
him up and put him into his pocket again, to the great relief of the
whole company.

The landlord now busied himself in laying the cloth, in which process
Mr Codlin obligingly assisted by setting forth his own knife and fork
in the most convenient place and establishing himself behind them.
When everything was ready, the landlord took off the cover for the last
time, and then indeed there burst forth such a goodly promise of
supper, that if he had offered to put it on again or had hinted at
postponement, he would certainly have been sacrificed on his own hearth.

However, he did nothing of the kind, but instead thereof assisted a
stout servant girl in turning the contents of the cauldron into a large
tureen; a proceeding which the dogs, proof against various hot splashes
which fell upon their noses, watched with terrible eagerness.  At
length the dish was lifted on the table, and mugs of ale having been
previously set round, little Nell ventured to say grace, and supper
began.

At this juncture the poor dogs were standing on their hind legs quite
surprisingly; the child, having pity on them, was about to cast some
morsels of food to them before she tasted it herself, hungry though she
was, when their master interposed.

‘No, my dear, no, not an atom from anybody’s hand but mine if you
please.  That dog,’ said Jerry, pointing out the old leader of the
troop, and speaking in a terrible voice, ‘lost a halfpenny to-day.  He
goes without his supper.’

The unfortunate creature dropped upon his fore-legs directly, wagged
his tail, and looked imploringly at his master.

‘You must be more careful, Sir,’ said Jerry, walking coolly to the
chair where he had placed the organ, and setting the stop.  ‘Come here.
Now, Sir, you play away at that, while we have supper, and leave off if
you dare.’

The dog immediately began to grind most mournful music.  His master
having shown him the whip resumed his seat and called up the others,
who, at his directions, formed in a row, standing upright as a file of
soldiers.

‘Now, gentlemen,’ said Jerry, looking at them attentively.  ‘The dog
whose name’s called, eats.  The dogs whose names an’t called, keep
quiet.  Carlo!’

The lucky individual whose name was called, snapped up the morsel
thrown towards him, but none of the others moved a muscle.  In this
manner they were fed at the discretion of their master.  Meanwhile the
dog in disgrace ground hard at the organ, sometimes in quick time,
sometimes in slow, but never leaving off for an instant.  When the
knives and forks rattled very much, or any of his fellows got an
unusually large piece of fat, he accompanied the music with a short
howl, but he immediately checked it on his master looking round, and
applied himself with increased diligence to the Old Hundredth.




CHAPTER 19

Supper was not yet over, when there arrived at the Jolly Sandboys two
more travellers bound for the same haven as the rest, who had been
walking in the rain for some hours, and came in shining and heavy with
water.  One of these was the proprietor of a giant, and a little lady
without legs or arms, who had jogged forward in a van; the other, a
silent gentleman who earned his living by showing tricks upon the
cards, and who had rather deranged the natural expression of his
countenance by putting small leaden lozenges into his eyes and bringing
them out at his mouth, which was one of his professional
accomplishments.  The name of the first of these newcomers was Vuffin;
the other, probably as a pleasant satire upon his ugliness, was called
Sweet William.  To render them as comfortable as he could, the landlord
bestirred himself nimbly, and in a very short time both gentlemen were
perfectly at their ease.

‘How’s the Giant?’ said Short, when they all sat smoking round the fire.

‘Rather weak upon his legs,’ returned Mr Vuffin.  ‘I begin to be afraid
he’s going at the knees.’

‘That’s a bad look-out,’ said Short.

‘Aye!  Bad indeed,’ replied Mr Vuffin, contemplating the fire with a
sigh.  ‘Once get a giant shaky on his legs, and the public care no more
about him than they do for a dead cabbage stalk.’

‘What becomes of old giants?’ said Short, turning to him again after a
little reflection.

‘They’re usually kept in carawans to wait upon the dwarfs,’ said Mr
Vuffin.

‘The maintaining of ‘em must come expensive, when they can’t be shown,
eh?’ remarked Short, eyeing him doubtfully.

‘It’s better that, than letting ‘em go upon the parish or about the
streets,’ said Mr Vuffin.  ‘Once make a giant common and giants will
never draw again.  Look at wooden legs.  If there was only one man with
a wooden leg what a property he’d be!’

‘So he would!’ observed the landlord and Short both together.  ‘That’s
very true.’

‘Instead of which,’ pursued Mr Vuffin, ‘if you was to advertise
Shakspeare played entirely by wooden legs, it’s my belief you wouldn’t
draw a sixpence.’

‘I don’t suppose you would,’ said Short.  And the landlord said so too.

‘This shows, you see,’ said Mr Vuffin, waving his pipe with an
argumentative air, ‘this shows the policy of keeping the used-up giants
still in the carawans, where they get food and lodging for nothing, all
their lives, and in general very glad they are to stop there.  There
was one giant--a black ‘un--as left his carawan some year ago and took
to carrying coach-bills about London, making himself as cheap as
crossing-sweepers.  He died.  I make no insinuation against anybody in
particular,’ said Mr Vuffin, looking solemnly round, ‘but he was
ruining the trade;--and he died.’

The landlord drew his breath hard, and looked at the owner of the dogs,
who nodded and said gruffly that he remembered.

‘I know you do, Jerry,’ said Mr Vuffin with profound meaning.  ‘I know
you remember it, Jerry, and the universal opinion was, that it served
him right.  Why, I remember the time when old Maunders as had
three-and-twenty wans--I remember the time when old Maunders had in his
cottage in Spa Fields in the winter time, when the season was over,
eight male and female dwarfs setting down to dinner every day, who was
waited on by eight old giants in green coats, red smalls, blue cotton
stockings, and high-lows: and there was one dwarf as had grown elderly
and wicious who whenever his giant wasn’t quick enough to please him,
used to stick pins in his legs, not being able to reach up any higher.
I know that’s a fact, for Maunders told it me himself.’

‘What about the dwarfs when they get old?’ inquired the landlord.

‘The older a dwarf is, the better worth he is,’ returned Mr Vuffin; ‘a
grey-headed dwarf, well wrinkled, is beyond all suspicion.  But a giant
weak in the legs and not standing upright!--keep him in the carawan,
but never show him, never show him, for any persuasion that can be
offered.’

While Mr Vuffin and his two friends smoked their pipes and beguiled the
time with such conversation as this, the silent gentleman sat in a warm
corner, swallowing, or seeming to swallow, sixpennyworth of halfpence
for practice, balancing a feather upon his nose, and rehearsing other
feats of dexterity of that kind, without paying any regard whatever to
the company, who in their turn left him utterly unnoticed.  At length
the weary child prevailed upon her grandfather to retire, and they
withdrew, leaving the company yet seated round the fire, and the dogs
fast asleep at a humble distance.

After bidding the old man good night, Nell retired to her poor garret,
but had scarcely closed the door, when it was gently tapped at.  She
opened it directly, and was a little startled by the sight of Mr Thomas
Codlin, whom she had left, to all appearance, fast asleep down stairs.

‘What is the matter?’ said the child.

‘Nothing’s the matter, my dear,’ returned her visitor.  ‘I’m your
friend.  Perhaps you haven’t thought so, but it’s me that’s your
friend--not him.’

‘Not who?’ the child inquired.

‘Short, my dear.  I tell you what,’ said Codlin, ‘for all his having a
kind of way with him that you’d be very apt to like, I’m the real,
open-hearted man.  I mayn’t look it, but I am indeed.’

The child began to be alarmed, considering that the ale had taken
effect upon Mr Codlin, and that this commendation of himself was the
consequence.

‘Short’s very well, and seems kind,’ resumed the misanthrope, ‘but he
overdoes it.  Now I don’t.’

Certainly if there were any fault in Mr Codlin’s usual deportment, it
was that he rather underdid his kindness to those about him, than
overdid it.  But the child was puzzled, and could not tell what to say.

‘Take my advice,’ said Codlin: ‘don’t ask me why, but take it.  As long
as you travel with us, keep as near me as you can.  Don’t offer to
leave us--not on any account--but always stick to me and say that I’m
your friend.  Will you bear that in mind, my dear, and always say that
it was me that was your friend?’

‘Say so where--and when?’ inquired the child innocently.

‘O, nowhere in particular,’ replied Codlin, a little put out as it
seemed by the question; ‘I’m only anxious that you should think me so,
and do me justice.  You can’t think what an interest I have in you.
Why didn’t you tell me your little history--that about you and the poor
old gentleman?  I’m the best adviser that ever was, and so interested
in you--so much more interested than Short.  I think they’re breaking
up down stairs; you needn’t tell Short, you know, that we’ve had this
little talk together.  God bless you.  Recollect the friend.  Codlin’s
the friend, not Short.  Short’s very well as far as he goes, but the
real friend is Codlin--not Short.’

Eking out these professions with a number of benevolent and protecting
looks and great fervour of manner, Thomas Codlin stole away on tiptoe,
leaving the child in a state of extreme surprise.  She was still
ruminating upon his curious behaviour, when the floor of the crazy
stairs and landing cracked beneath the tread of the other travellers
who were passing to their beds.  When they had all passed, and the
sound of their footsteps had died away, one of them returned, and after
a little hesitation and rustling in the passage, as if he were doubtful
what door to knock at, knocked at hers.

‘Yes,’ said the child from within.

‘It’s me--Short’--a voice called through the keyhole.  ‘I only wanted
to say that we must be off early to-morrow morning, my dear, because
unless we get the start of the dogs and the conjuror, the villages
won’t be worth a penny.  You’ll be sure to be stirring early and go
with us?  I’ll call you.’

The child answered in the affirmative, and returning his ‘good night’
heard him creep away.  She felt some uneasiness at the anxiety of these
men, increased by the recollection of their whispering together down
stairs and their slight confusion when she awoke, nor was she quite
free from a misgiving that they were not the fittest companions she
could have stumbled on.  Her uneasiness, however, was nothing, weighed
against her fatigue; and she soon forgot it in sleep.

Very early next morning, Short fulfilled his promise, and knocking
softly at her door, entreated that she would get up directly, as the
proprietor of the dogs was still snoring, and if they lost no time they
might get a good deal in advance both of him and the conjuror, who was
talking in his sleep, and from what he could be heard to say, appeared
to be balancing a donkey in his dreams.  She started from her bed
without delay, and roused the old man with so much expedition that they
were both ready as soon as Short himself, to that gentleman’s
unspeakable gratification and relief.

After a very unceremonious and scrambling breakfast, of which the
staple commodities were bacon and bread, and beer, they took leave of
the landlord and issued from the door of the jolly Sandboys.  The
morning was fine and warm, the ground cool to the feet after the late
rain, the hedges gayer and more green, the air clear, and everything
fresh and healthful.  Surrounded by these influences, they walked on
pleasantly enough.

They had not gone very far, when the child was again struck by the
altered behaviour of Mr Thomas Codlin, who instead of plodding on
sulkily by himself as he had heretofore done, kept close to her, and
when he had an opportunity of looking at her unseen by his companion,
warned her by certain wry faces and jerks of the head not to put any
trust in Short, but to reserve all confidences for Codlin.  Neither did
he confine himself to looks and gestures, for when she and her
grandfather were walking on beside the aforesaid Short, and that little
man was talking with his accustomed cheerfulness on a variety of
indifferent subjects, Thomas Codlin testified his jealousy and distrust
by following close at her heels, and occasionally admonishing her
ankles with the legs of the theatre in a very abrupt and painful manner.

All these proceedings naturally made the child more watchful and
suspicious, and she soon observed that whenever they halted to perform
outside a village alehouse or other place, Mr Codlin while he went
through his share of the entertainments kept his eye steadily upon her
and the old man, or with a show of great friendship and consideration
invited the latter to lean upon his arm, and so held him tight until
the representation was over and they again went forward.  Even Short
seemed to change in this respect, and to mingle with his good-nature
something of a desire to keep them in safe custody.  This increased the
child’s misgivings, and made her yet more anxious and uneasy.

Meanwhile, they were drawing near the town where the races were to
begin next day; for, from passing numerous groups of gipsies and
trampers on the road, wending their way towards it, and straggling out
from every by-way and cross-country lane, they gradually fell into a
stream of people, some walking by the side of covered carts, others
with horses, others with donkeys, others toiling on with heavy loads
upon their backs, but all tending to the same point.  The public-houses
by the wayside, from being empty and noiseless as those in the remoter
parts had been, now sent out boisterous shouts and clouds of smoke;
and, from the misty windows, clusters of broad red faces looked down
upon the road.  On every piece of waste or common ground, some small
gambler drove his noisy trade, and bellowed to the idle passersby to
stop and try their chance; the crowd grew thicker and more noisy; gilt
gingerbread in blanket-stalls exposed its glories to the dust; and
often a four-horse carriage, dashing by, obscured all objects in the
gritty cloud it raised, and left them, stunned and blinded, far behind.

It was dark before they reached the town itself, and long indeed the
few last miles had been.  Here all was tumult and confusion; the
streets were filled with throngs of people--many strangers were there,
it seemed, by the looks they cast about--the church-bells rang out
their noisy peals, and flags streamed from windows and house-tops.  In
the large inn-yards waiters flitted to and fro and ran against each
other, horses clattered on the uneven stones, carriage steps fell
rattling down, and sickening smells from many dinners came in a heavy
lukewarm breath upon the sense.  In the smaller public-houses, fiddles
with all their might and main were squeaking out the tune to staggering
feet; drunken men, oblivious of the burden of their song, joined in a
senseless howl, which drowned the tinkling of the feeble bell and made
them savage for their drink; vagabond groups assembled round the doors
to see the stroller woman dance, and add their uproar to the shrill
flageolet and deafening drum.

Through this delirious scene, the child, frightened and repelled by all
she saw, led on her bewildered charge, clinging close to her conductor,
and trembling lest in the press she should be separated from him and
left to find her way alone.  Quickening their steps to get clear of all
the roar and riot, they at length passed through the town and made for
the race-course, which was upon an open heath, situated on an eminence,
a full mile distant from its furthest bounds.

Although there were many people here, none of the best favoured or best
clad, busily erecting tents and driving stakes in the ground, and
hurrying to and fro with dusty feet and many a grumbled oath--although
there were tired children cradled on heaps of straw between the wheels
of carts, crying themselves to sleep--and poor lean horses and donkeys
just turned loose, grazing among the men and women, and pots and
kettles, and half-lighted fires, and ends of candles flaring and
wasting in the air--for all this, the child felt it an escape from the
town and drew her breath more freely.  After a scanty supper, the
purchase of which reduced her little stock so low, that she had only a
few halfpence with which to buy a breakfast on the morrow, she and the
old man lay down to rest in a corner of a tent, and slept, despite the
busy preparations that were going on around them all night long.

And now they had come to the time when they must beg their bread.  Soon
after sunrise in the morning she stole out from the tent, and rambling
into some fields at a short distance, plucked a few wild roses and such
humble flowers, purposing to make them into little nosegays and offer
them to the ladies in the carriages when the company arrived.  Her
thoughts were not idle while she was thus employed; when she returned
and was seated beside the old man in one corner of the tent, tying her
flowers together, while the two men lay dozing in another corner, she
plucked him by the sleeve, and slightly glancing towards them, said, in
a low voice--

‘Grandfather, don’t look at those I talk of, and don’t seem as if I
spoke of anything but what I am about.  What was that you told me
before we left the old house?  That if they knew what we were going to
do, they would say that you were mad, and part us?’

The old man turned to her with an aspect of wild terror; but she
checked him by a look, and bidding him hold some flowers while she tied
them up, and so bringing her lips closer to his ear, said--

‘I know that was what you told me.  You needn’t speak, dear.  I
recollect it very well.  It was not likely that I should forget it.
Grandfather, these men suspect that we have secretly left our friends,
and mean to carry us before some gentleman and have us taken care of
and sent back.  If you let your hand tremble so, we can never get away
from them, but if you’re only quiet now, we shall do so, easily.’

‘How?’ muttered the old man.  ‘Dear Nelly, how?  They will shut me up
in a stone room, dark and cold, and chain me up to the wall, Nell--flog
me with whips, and never let me see thee more!’

‘You’re trembling again,’ said the child.  ‘Keep close to me all day.
Never mind them, don’t look at them, but me.  I shall find a time when
we can steal away.  When I do, mind you come with me, and do not stop
or speak a word.  Hush!  That’s all.’

‘Halloa! what are you up to, my dear?’ said Mr Codlin, raising his
head, and yawning.  Then observing that his companion was fast asleep,
he added in an earnest whisper, ‘Codlin’s the friend, remember--not
Short.’

‘Making some nosegays,’ the child replied; ‘I am going to try and sell
some, these three days of the races.  Will you have one--as a present I
mean?’

Mr Codlin would have risen to receive it, but the child hurried towards
him and placed it in his hand.  He stuck it in his buttonhole with an
air of ineffable complacency for a misanthrope, and leering exultingly
at the unconscious Short, muttered, as he laid himself down again, ‘Tom
Codlin’s the friend, by G--!’

As the morning wore on, the tents assumed a gayer and more brilliant
appearance, and long lines of carriages came rolling softly on the
turf.  Men who had lounged about all night in smock-frocks and leather
leggings, came out in silken vests and hats and plumes, as jugglers or
mountebanks; or in gorgeous liveries as soft-spoken servants at
gambling booths; or in sturdy yeoman dress as decoys at unlawful games.
Black-eyed gipsy girls, hooded in showy handkerchiefs, sallied forth to
tell fortunes, and pale slender women with consumptive faces lingered
upon the footsteps of ventriloquists and conjurors, and counted the
sixpences with anxious eyes long before they were gained.  As many of
the children as could be kept within bounds, were stowed away, with all
the other signs of dirt and poverty, among the donkeys, carts, and
horses; and as many as could not be thus disposed of ran in and out in
all intricate spots, crept between people’s legs and carriage wheels,
and came forth unharmed from under horses’ hoofs.  The dancing-dogs,
the stilts, the little lady and the tall man, and all the other
attractions, with organs out of number and bands innumerable, emerged
from the holes and corners in which they had passed the night, and
flourished boldly in the sun.

Along the uncleared course, Short led his party, sounding the brazen
trumpet and revelling in the voice of Punch; and at his heels went
Thomas Codlin, bearing the show as usual, and keeping his eye on Nelly
and her grandfather, as they rather lingered in the rear.  The child
bore upon her arm the little basket with her flowers, and sometimes
stopped, with timid and modest looks, to offer them at some gay
carriage; but alas! there were many bolder beggars there, gipsies who
promised husbands, and other adepts in their trade, and although some
ladies smiled gently as they shook their heads, and others cried to the
gentlemen beside them ‘See, what a pretty face!’ they let the pretty
face pass on, and never thought that it looked tired or hungry.

There was but one lady who seemed to understand the child, and she was
one who sat alone in a handsome carriage, while two young men in
dashing clothes, who had just dismounted from it, talked and laughed
loudly at a little distance, appearing to forget her, quite.  There
were many ladies all around, but they turned their backs, or looked
another way, or at the two young men (not unfavourably at them), and
left her to herself.  She motioned away a gipsy-woman urgent to tell
her fortune, saying that it was told already and had been for some
years, but called the child towards her, and taking her flowers put
money into her trembling hand, and bade her go home and keep at home
for God’s sake.

Many a time they went up and down those long, long lines, seeing
everything but the horses and the race; when the bell rang to clear the
course, going back to rest among the carts and donkeys, and not coming
out again until the heat was over.  Many a time, too, was Punch
displayed in the full zenith of his humour, but all this while the eye
of Thomas Codlin was upon them, and to escape without notice was
impracticable.

At length, late in the day, Mr Codlin pitched the show in a convenient
spot, and the spectators were soon in the very triumph of the scene.
The child, sitting down with the old man close behind it, had been
thinking how strange it was that horses who were such fine honest
creatures should seem to make vagabonds of all the men they drew about
them, when a loud laugh at some extemporaneous witticism of Mr Short’s,
having allusion to the circumstances of the day, roused her from her
meditation and caused her to look around.

If they were ever to get away unseen, that was the very moment.  Short
was plying the quarter-staves vigorously and knocking the characters in
the fury of the combat against the sides of the show, the people were
looking on with laughing faces, and Mr Codlin had relaxed into a grim
smile as his roving eye detected hands going into waistcoat pockets and
groping secretly for sixpences.  If they were ever to get away unseen,
that was the very moment.  They seized it, and fled.

They made a path through booths and carriages and throngs of people,
and never once stopped to look behind.  The bell was ringing and the
course was cleared by the time they reached the ropes, but they dashed
across it insensible to the shouts and screeching that assailed them
for breaking in upon its sanctity, and creeping under the brow of the
hill at a quick pace, made for the open fields.




CHAPTER 20

Day after day as he bent his steps homeward, returning from some new
effort to procure employment, Kit raised his eyes to the window of the
little room he had so much commended to the child, and hoped to see
some indication of her presence.  His own earnest wish, coupled with
the assurance he had received from Quilp, filled him with the belief
that she would yet arrive to claim the humble shelter he had offered,
and from the death of each day’s hope another hope sprung up to live
to-morrow.

‘I think they must certainly come to-morrow, eh mother?’ said Kit,
laying aside his hat with a weary air and sighing as he spoke.  ‘They
have been gone a week.  They surely couldn’t stop away more than a
week, could they now?’

The mother shook her head, and reminded him how often he had been
disappointed already.

‘For the matter of that,’ said Kit, ‘you speak true and sensible
enough, as you always do, mother.  Still, I do consider that a week is
quite long enough for ‘em to be rambling about; don’t you say so?’

‘Quite long enough, Kit, longer than enough, but they may not come back
for all that.’

Kit was for a moment disposed to be vexed by this contradiction, and
not the less so from having anticipated it in his own mind and knowing
how just it was.  But the impulse was only momentary, and the vexed
look became a kind one before it had crossed the room.

‘Then what do you think, mother, has become of ‘em?  You don’t think
they’ve gone to sea, anyhow?’

‘Not gone for sailors, certainly,’ returned the mother with a smile.
‘But I can’t help thinking that they have gone to some foreign country.’

‘I say,’ cried Kit with a rueful face, ‘don’t talk like that, mother.’

‘I am afraid they have, and that’s the truth,’ she said.  ‘It’s the
talk of all the neighbours, and there are some even that know of their
having been seen on board ship, and can tell you the name of the place
they’ve gone to, which is more than I can, my dear, for it’s a very
hard one.’

‘I don’t believe it,’ said Kit.  ‘Not a word of it.  A set of idle
chatterboxes, how should they know!’

‘They may be wrong of course,’ returned the mother, ‘I can’t tell about
that, though I don’t think it’s at all unlikely that they’re in the
right, for the talk is that the old gentleman had put by a little money
that nobody knew of, not even that ugly little man you talk to me
about--what’s his name--Quilp; and that he and Miss Nell have gone to
live abroad where it can’t be taken from them, and they will never be
disturbed.  That don’t seem very far out of the way now, do it?’

Kit scratched his head mournfully, in reluctant admission that it did
not, and clambering up to the old nail took down the cage and set
himself to clean it and to feed the bird.  His thoughts reverting from
this occupation to the little old gentleman who had given him the
shilling, he suddenly recollected that that was the very day--nay,
nearly the very hour--at which the little old gentleman had said he
should be at the Notary’s house again.  He no sooner remembered this,
than he hung up the cage with great precipitation, and hastily
explaining the nature of his errand, went off at full speed to the
appointed place.

It was some two minutes after the time when he reached the spot, which
was a considerable distance from his home, but by great good luck the
little old gentleman had not yet arrived; at least there was no
pony-chaise to be seen, and it was not likely that he had come and gone
again in so short a space.  Greatly relieved to find that he was not
too late, Kit leant against a lamp-post to take breath, and waited the
advent of the pony and his charge.

Sure enough, before long the pony came trotting round the corner of the
street, looking as obstinate as pony might, and picking his steps as if
he were spying about for the cleanest places, and would by no means
dirty his feet or hurry himself inconveniently.  Behind the pony sat
the little old gentleman, and by the old gentleman’s side sat the
little old lady, carrying just such a nosegay as she had brought before.

The old gentleman, the old lady, the pony, and the chaise, came up the
street in perfect unanimity, until they arrived within some half a
dozen doors of the Notary’s house, when the pony, deceived by a
brass-plate beneath a tailor’s knocker, came to a halt, and maintained
by a sturdy silence, that that was the house they wanted.

‘Now, Sir, will you ha’ the goodness to go on; this is not the place,’
said the old gentleman.

The pony looked with great attention into a fire-plug which was near
him, and appeared to be quite absorbed in contemplating it.

‘Oh dear, such a naughty Whisker!’ cried the old lady.  ‘After being so
good too, and coming along so well!  I am quite ashamed of him.  I
don’t know what we are to do with him, I really don’t.’

The pony having thoroughly satisfied himself as to the nature and
properties of the fire-plug, looked into the air after his old enemies
the flies, and as there happened to be one of them tickling his ear at
that moment he shook his head and whisked his tail, after which he
appeared full of thought but quite comfortable and collected.  The old
gentleman having exhausted his powers of persuasion, alighted to lead
him; whereupon the pony, perhaps because he held this to be a
sufficient concession, perhaps because he happened to catch sight of
the other brass-plate, or perhaps because he was in a spiteful humour,
darted off with the old lady and stopped at the right house, leaving
the old gentleman to come panting on behind.

It was then that Kit presented himself at the pony’s head, and touched
his hat with a smile.

‘Why, bless me,’ cried the old gentleman, ‘the lad is here!  My dear,
do you see?’

‘I said I’d be here, Sir,’ said Kit, patting Whisker’s neck.  ‘I hope
you’ve had a pleasant ride, sir.  He’s a very nice little pony.’

‘My dear,’ said the old gentleman.  ‘This is an uncommon lad; a good
lad, I’m sure.’

‘I’m sure he is,’ rejoined the old lady.  ‘A very good lad, and I am
sure he is a good son.’

Kit acknowledged these expressions of confidence by touching his hat
again and blushing very much.  The old gentleman then handed the old
lady out, and after looking at him with an approving smile, they went
into the house--talking about him as they went, Kit could not help
feeling.  Presently Mr Witherden, smelling very hard at the nosegay,
came to the window and looked at him, and after that Mr Abel came and
looked at him, and after that the old gentleman and lady came and
looked at him again, and after that they all came and looked at him
together, which Kit, feeling very much embarrassed by, made a pretence
of not observing.  Therefore he patted the pony more and more; and this
liberty the pony most handsomely permitted.

The faces had not disappeared from the window many moments, when Mr
Chuckster in his official coat, and with his hat hanging on his head
just as it happened to fall from its peg, appeared upon the pavement,
and telling him he was wanted inside, bade him go in and he would mind
the chaise the while.  In giving him this direction Mr Chuckster
remarked that he wished that he might be blessed if he could make out
whether he (Kit) was ‘precious raw’ or ‘precious deep,’ but intimated
by a distrustful shake of the head, that he inclined to the latter
opinion.

Kit entered the office in a great tremor, for he was not used to going
among strange ladies and gentlemen, and the tin boxes and bundles of
dusty papers had in his eyes an awful and venerable air.  Mr Witherden
too was a bustling gentleman who talked loud and fast, and all eyes
were upon him, and he was very shabby.

‘Well, boy,’ said Mr Witherden, ‘you came to work out that
shilling;--not to get another, hey?’

‘No indeed, sir,’ replied Kit, taking courage to look up.  ‘I never
thought of such a thing.’

‘Father alive?’ said the Notary.

‘Dead, sir.’

‘Mother?’

‘Yes, sir.’

‘Married again--eh?’

Kit made answer, not without some indignation, that she was a widow
with three children, and that as to her marrying again, if the
gentleman knew her he wouldn’t think of such a thing.  At this reply Mr
Witherden buried his nose in the flowers again, and whispered behind
the nosegay to the old gentleman that he believed the lad was as honest
a lad as need be.

‘Now,’ said Mr Garland when they had made some further inquiries of
him, ‘I am not going to give you anything--’

‘Thank you, sir,’ Kit replied; and quite seriously too, for this
announcement seemed to free him from the suspicion which the Notary had
hinted.

‘--But,’ resumed the old gentleman, ‘perhaps I may want to know
something more about you, so tell me where you live, and I’ll put it
down in my pocket-book.’

Kit told him, and the old gentleman wrote down the address with his
pencil.  He had scarcely done so, when there was a great uproar in the
street, and the old lady hurrying to the window cried that Whisker had
run away, upon which Kit darted out to the rescue, and the others
followed.

It seemed that Mr Chuckster had been standing with his hands in his
pockets looking carelessly at the pony, and occasionally insulting him
with such admonitions as ‘Stand still,’--‘Be quiet,’--‘Woa-a-a,’ and the
like, which by a pony of spirit cannot be borne.  Consequently, the
pony being deterred by no considerations of duty or obedience, and not
having before him the slightest fear of the human eye, had at length
started off, and was at that moment rattling down the street--Mr
Chuckster, with his hat off and a pen behind his ear, hanging on in the
rear of the chaise and making futile attempts to draw it the other way,
to the unspeakable admiration of all beholders.  Even in running away,
however, Whisker was perverse, for he had not gone very far when he
suddenly stopped, and before assistance could be rendered, commenced
backing at nearly as quick a pace as he had gone forward.  By these
means Mr Chuckster was pushed and hustled to the office again, in a
most inglorious manner, and arrived in a state of great exhaustion and
discomfiture.

The old lady then stepped into her seat, and Mr Abel (whom they had
come to fetch) into his.  The old gentleman, after reasoning with the
pony on the extreme impropriety of his conduct, and making the best
amends in his power to Mr Chuckster, took his place also, and they
drove away, waving a farewell to the Notary and his clerk, and more
than once turning to nod kindly to Kit as he watched them from the road.




CHAPTER 21

Kit turned away and very soon forgot the pony, and the chaise, and the
little old lady, and the little old gentleman, and the little young
gentleman to boot, in thinking what could have become of his late
master and his lovely grandchild, who were the fountain-head of all his
meditations.  Still casting about for some plausible means of
accounting for their non-appearance, and of persuading himself that
they must soon return, he bent his steps towards home, intending to
finish the task which the sudden recollection of his contract had
interrupted, and then to sally forth once more to seek his fortune for
the day.

When he came to the corner of the court in which he lived, lo and
behold there was the pony again!  Yes, there he was, looking more
obstinate than ever; and alone in the chaise, keeping a steady watch
upon his every wink, sat Mr Abel, who, lifting up his eyes by chance
and seeing Kit pass by, nodded to him as though he would have nodded
his head off.

Kit wondered to see the pony again, so near his own home too, but it
never occurred to him for what purpose the pony might have come there,
or where the old lady and the old gentleman had gone, until he lifted
the latch of the door, and walking in, found them seated in the room in
conversation with his mother, at which unexpected sight he pulled off
his hat and made his best bow in some confusion.

‘We are here before you, you see, Christopher,’ said Mr Garland smiling.

‘Yes, sir,’ said Kit; and as he said it, he looked towards his mother
for an explanation of the visit.

‘The gentleman’s been kind enough, my dear,’ said she, in reply to this
mute interrogation, ‘to ask me whether you were in a good place, or in
any place at all, and when I told him no, you were not in any, he was
so good as to say that--’

‘--That we wanted a good lad in our house,’ said the old gentleman and
the old lady both together, ‘and that perhaps we might think of it, if
we found everything as we would wish it to be.’

As this thinking of it, plainly meant the thinking of engaging Kit, he
immediately partook of his mother’s anxiety and fell into a great
flutter; for the little old couple were very methodical and cautious,
and asked so many questions that he began to be afraid there was no
chance of his success.

‘You see, my good woman,’ said Mrs Garland to Kit’s mother, ‘that it’s
necessary to be very careful and particular in such a matter as this,
for we’re only three in family, and are very quiet regular folks, and
it would be a sad thing if we made any kind of mistake, and found
things different from what we hoped and expected.’

To this, Kit’s mother replied, that certainly it was quite true, and
quite right, and quite proper, and Heaven forbid that she should
shrink, or have cause to shrink, from any inquiry into her character or
that of her son, who was a very good son though she was his mother, in
which respect, she was bold to say, he took after his father, who was
not only a good son to HIS mother, but the best of husbands and the
best of fathers besides, which Kit could and would corroborate she
knew, and so would little Jacob and the baby likewise if they were old
enough, which unfortunately they were not, though as they didn’t know
what a loss they had had, perhaps it was a great deal better that they
should be as young as they were; and so Kit’s mother wound up a long
story by wiping her eyes with her apron, and patting little Jacob’s
head, who was rocking the cradle and staring with all his might at the
strange lady and gentleman.

When Kit’s mother had done speaking, the old lady struck in again, and
said that she was quite sure she was a very honest and very respectable
person or she never would have expressed herself in that manner, and
that certainly the appearance of the children and the cleanliness of
the house deserved great praise and did her the utmost credit, whereat
Kit’s mother dropped a curtsey and became consoled.  Then the good
woman entered in a long and minute account of Kit’s life and history
from the earliest period down to that time, not omitting to make
mention of his miraculous fall out of a back-parlour window when an
infant of tender years, or his uncommon sufferings in a state of
measles, which were illustrated by correct imitations of the plaintive
manner in which he called for toast and water, day and night, and said,
‘don’t cry, mother, I shall soon be better;’ for proof of which
statements reference was made to Mrs Green, lodger, at the
cheesemonger’s round the corner, and divers other ladies and gentlemen
in various parts of England and Wales (and one Mr Brown who was
supposed to be then a corporal in the East Indies, and who could of
course be found with very little trouble), within whose personal
knowledge the circumstances had occurred.  This narration ended, Mr
Garland put some questions to Kit respecting his qualifications and
general acquirements, while Mrs Garland noticed the children, and
hearing from Kit’s mother certain remarkable circumstances which had
attended the birth of each, related certain other remarkable
circumstances which had attended the birth of her own son, Mr Abel,
from which it appeared that both Kit’s mother and herself had been,
above and beyond all other women of what condition or age soever,
peculiarly hemmed in with perils and dangers.  Lastly, inquiry was made
into the nature and extent of Kit’s wardrobe, and a small advance being
made to improve the same, he was formally hired at an annual income of
Six Pounds, over and above his board and lodging, by Mr and Mrs
Garland, of Abel Cottage, Finchley.

It would be difficult to say which party appeared most pleased with
this arrangement, the conclusion of which was hailed with nothing but
pleasant looks and cheerful smiles on both sides.  It was settled that
Kit should repair to his new abode on the next day but one, in the
morning; and finally, the little old couple, after bestowing a bright
half-crown on little Jacob and another on the baby, took their leaves;
being escorted as far as the street by their new attendant, who held
the obdurate pony by the bridle while they took their seats, and saw
them drive away with a lightened heart.

‘Well, mother,’ said Kit, hurrying back into the house, ‘I think my
fortune’s about made now.’

‘I should think it was indeed, Kit,’ rejoined his mother.  ‘Six pound a
year!  Only think!’

‘Ah!’ said Kit, trying to maintain the gravity which the consideration
of such a sum demanded, but grinning with delight in spite of himself.
‘There’s a property!’

Kit drew a long breath when he had said this, and putting his hands
deep into his pockets as if there were one year’s wages at least in
each, looked at his mother, as though he saw through her, and down an
immense perspective of sovereigns beyond.

‘Please God we’ll make such a lady of you for Sundays, mother! such a
scholar of Jacob, such a child of the baby, such a room of the one up
stairs!  Six pound a year!’

‘Hem!’ croaked a strange voice.  ‘What’s that about six pound a year?
What about six pound a year?’  And as the voice made this inquiry,
Daniel Quilp walked in with Richard Swiveller at his heels.

‘Who said he was to have six pound a year?’ said Quilp, looking sharply
round.  ‘Did the old man say it, or did little Nell say it?  And what’s
he to have it for, and where are they, eh!’

The good woman was so much alarmed by the sudden apparition of this
unknown piece of ugliness, that she hastily caught the baby from its
cradle and retreated into the furthest corner of the room; while little
Jacob, sitting upon his stool with his hands on his knees, looked full
at him in a species of fascination, roaring lustily all the time.
Richard Swiveller took an easy observation of the family over Mr Quilp’s
head, and Quilp himself, with his hands in his pockets, smiled in an
exquisite enjoyment of the commotion he occasioned.

‘Don’t be frightened, mistress,’ said Quilp, after a pause.  ‘Your son
knows me; I don’t eat babies; I don’t like ‘em.  It will be as well to
stop that young screamer though, in case I should be tempted to do him
a mischief.  Holloa, sir!  Will you be quiet?’

Little Jacob stemmed the course of two tears which he was squeezing out
of his eyes, and instantly subsided into a silent horror.

‘Mind you don’t break out again, you villain,’ said Quilp, looking
sternly at him, ‘or I’ll make faces at you and throw you into fits, I
will.  Now you sir, why haven’t you been to me as you promised?’

‘What should I come for?’ retorted Kit.  ‘I hadn’t any business with
you, no more than you had with me.’

‘Here, mistress,’ said Quilp, turning quickly away, and appealing from
Kit to his mother.  ‘When did his old master come or send here last?
Is he here now?  If not, where’s he gone?’

‘He has not been here at all,’ she replied.  ‘I wish we knew where they
have gone, for it would make my son a good deal easier in his mind, and
me too.  If you’re the gentleman named Mr Quilp, I should have thought
you’d have known, and so I told him only this very day.’

‘Humph!’ muttered Quilp, evidently disappointed to believe that this
was true.  ‘That’s what you tell this gentleman too, is it?’

‘If the gentleman comes to ask the same question, I can’t tell him
anything else, sir; and I only wish I could, for our own sakes,’ was
the reply.

Quilp glanced at Richard Swiveller, and observed that having met him on
the threshold, he assumed that he had come in search of some
intelligence of the fugitives.  He supposed he was right?

‘Yes,’ said Dick, ‘that was the object of the present expedition.  I
fancied it possible--but let us go ring fancy’s knell.  I’ll begin it.’

‘You seem disappointed,’ observed Quilp.

‘A baffler, Sir, a baffler, that’s all,’ returned Dick.  ‘I have
entered upon a speculation which has proved a baffler; and a Being of
brightness and beauty will be offered up a sacrifice at Cheggs’s altar.
That’s all, sir.’

The dwarf eyed Richard with a sarcastic smile, but Richard, who had
been taking a rather strong lunch with a friend, observed him not, and
continued to deplore his fate with mournful and despondent looks.
Quilp plainly discerned that there was some secret reason for this
visit and his uncommon disappointment, and, in the hope that there
might be means of mischief lurking beneath it, resolved to worm it out.
He had no sooner adopted this resolution, than he conveyed as much
honesty into his face as it was capable of expressing, and sympathised
with Mr Swiveller exceedingly.

‘I am disappointed myself,’ said Quilp, ‘out of mere friendly feeling
for them; but you have real reasons, private reasons I have no doubt,
for your disappointment, and therefore it comes heavier than mine.’

‘Why, of course it does,’ Dick observed, testily.

‘Upon my word, I’m very sorry, very sorry.  I’m rather cast down
myself.  As we are companions in adversity, shall we be companions in
the surest way of forgetting it?  If you had no particular business,
now, to lead you in another direction,’ urged Quilp, plucking him by
the sleeve and looking slyly up into his face out of the corners of his
eyes, ‘there is a house by the water-side where they have some of the
noblest Schiedam--reputed to be smuggled, but that’s between
ourselves--that can be got in all the world.  The landlord knows me.
There’s a little summer-house overlooking the river, where we might
take a glass of this delicious liquor with a whiff of the best
tobacco--it’s in this case, and of the rarest quality, to my certain
knowledge--and be perfectly snug and happy, could we possibly contrive
it; or is there any very particular engagement that peremptorily takes
you another way, Mr Swiveller, eh?’

As the dwarf spoke, Dick’s face relaxed into a compliant smile, and his
brows slowly unbent.  By the time he had finished, Dick was looking
down at Quilp in the same sly manner as Quilp was looking up at him,
and there remained nothing more to be done but to set out for the house
in question.  This they did, straightway.  The moment their backs were
turned, little Jacob thawed, and resumed his crying from the point
where Quilp had frozen him.

The summer-house of which Mr Quilp had spoken was a rugged wooden box,
rotten and bare to see, which overhung the river’s mud, and threatened
to slide down into it.  The tavern to which it belonged was a crazy
building, sapped and undermined by the rats, and only upheld by great
bars of wood which were reared against its walls, and had propped it up
so long that even they were decaying and yielding with their load, and
of a windy night might be heard to creak and crack as if the whole
fabric were about to come toppling down.  The house stood--if anything
so old and feeble could be said to stand--on a piece of waste ground,
blighted with the unwholesome smoke of factory chimneys, and echoing
the clank of iron wheels and rush of troubled water.  Its internal
accommodations amply fulfilled the promise of the outside.  The rooms
were low and damp, the clammy walls were pierced with chinks and holes,
the rotten floors had sunk from their level, the very beams started
from their places and warned the timid stranger from their
neighbourhood.

To this inviting spot, entreating him to observe its beauties as they
passed along, Mr Quilp led Richard Swiveller, and on the table of the
summer-house, scored deep with many a gallows and initial letter, there
soon appeared a wooden keg, full of the vaunted liquor.  Drawing it off
into the glasses with the skill of a practised hand, and mixing it with
about a third part of water, Mr Quilp assigned to Richard Swiveller his
portion, and lighting his pipe from an end of a candle in a very old
and battered lantern, drew himself together upon a seat and puffed away.

‘Is it good?’ said Quilp, as Richard Swiveller smacked his lips, ‘is it
strong and fiery?  Does it make you wink, and choke, and your eyes
water, and your breath come short--does it?’

‘Does it?’ cried Dick, throwing away part of the contents of his glass,
and filling it up with water, ‘why, man, you don’t mean to tell me that
you drink such fire as this?’

‘No!’ rejoined Quilp, ‘Not drink it!  Look here.  And here.  And here
again.  Not drink it!’

As he spoke, Daniel Quilp drew off and drank three small glassfuls of
the raw spirit, and then with a horrible grimace took a great many
pulls at his pipe, and swallowing the smoke, discharged it in a heavy
cloud from his nose.  This feat accomplished he drew himself together
in his former position, and laughed excessively.

‘Give us a toast!’ cried Quilp, rattling on the table in a dexterous
manner with his fist and elbow alternately, in a kind of tune, ‘a
woman, a beauty.  Let’s have a beauty for our toast and empty our
glasses to the last drop.  Her name, come!’

‘If you want a name,’ said Dick, ‘here’s Sophy Wackles.’

‘Sophy Wackles,’ screamed the dwarf, ‘Miss Sophy Wackles that is--Mrs
Richard Swiveller that shall be--that shall be--ha ha ha!’

‘Ah!’ said Dick, ‘you might have said that a few weeks ago, but it
won’t do now, my buck.  Immolating herself upon the shrine of Cheggs--’

‘Poison Cheggs, cut Cheggs’s ears off,’ rejoined Quilp.  ‘I won’t hear
of Cheggs.  Her name is Swiveller or nothing.  I’ll drink her health
again, and her father’s, and her mother’s; and to all her sisters and
brothers--the glorious family of the Wackleses--all the Wackleses in
one glass--down with it to the dregs!’

‘Well,’ said Richard Swiveller, stopping short in the act of raising
the glass to his lips and looking at the dwarf in a species of stupor
as he flourished his arms and legs about: ‘you’re a jolly fellow, but
of all the jolly fellows I ever saw or heard of, you have the queerest
and most extraordinary way with you, upon my life you have.’

This candid declaration tended rather to increase than restrain Mr
Quilp’s eccentricities, and Richard Swiveller, astonished to see him in
such a roystering vein, and drinking not a little himself, for
company--began imperceptibly to become more companionable and
confiding, so that, being judiciously led on by Mr Quilp, he grew at
last very confiding indeed.  Having once got him into this mood, and
knowing now the key-note to strike whenever he was at a loss, Daniel
Quilp’s task was comparatively an easy one, and he was soon in
possession of the whole details of the scheme contrived between the
easy Dick and his more designing friend.

‘Stop!’ said Quilp.  ‘That’s the thing, that’s the thing.  It can be
brought about, it shall be brought about.  There’s my hand upon it; I
am your friend from this minute.’

‘What! do you think there’s still a chance?’ inquired Dick, in surprise
at this encouragement.

‘A chance!’ echoed the dwarf, ‘a certainty!  Sophy Wackles may become a
Cheggs or anything else she likes, but not a Swiveller.  Oh you lucky
dog!  He’s richer than any Jew alive; you’re a made man.  I see in you
now nothing but Nelly’s husband, rolling in gold and silver.  I’ll help
you.  It shall be done.  Mind my words, it shall be done.’

‘But how?’ said Dick.

‘There’s plenty of time,’ rejoined the dwarf, ‘and it shall be done.
We’ll sit down and talk it over again all the way through.  Fill your
glass while I’m gone.  I shall be back directly--directly.’

With these hasty words, Daniel Quilp withdrew into a dismantled skittle-
ground behind the public-house, and, throwing himself upon the ground
actually screamed and rolled about in uncontrollable delight.

‘Here’s sport!’ he cried, ‘sport ready to my hand, all invented and
arranged, and only to be enjoyed.  It was this shallow-pated fellow who
made my bones ache t’other day, was it?  It was his friend and
fellow-plotter, Mr Trent, that once made eyes at Mrs Quilp, and leered
and looked, was it?  After labouring for two or three years in their
precious scheme, to find that they’ve got a beggar at last, and one of
them tied for life.  Ha ha ha!  He shall marry Nell.  He shall have
her, and I’ll be the first man, when the knot’s tied hard and fast, to
tell ‘em what they’ve gained and what I’ve helped ‘em to.  Here will be
a clearing of old scores, here will be a time to remind ‘em what a
capital friend I was, and how I helped them to the heiress.  Ha ha ha!’

In the height of his ecstasy, Mr Quilp had like to have met with a
disagreeable check, for rolling very near a broken dog-kennel, there
leapt forth a large fierce dog, who, but that his chain was of the
shortest, would have given him a disagreeable salute.  As it was, the
dwarf remained upon his back in perfect safety, taunting the dog with
hideous faces, and triumphing over him in his inability to advance
another inch, though there were not a couple of feet between them.

‘Why don’t you come and bite me, why don’t you come and tear me to
pieces, you coward?’ said Quilp, hissing and worrying the animal till
he was nearly mad.  ‘You’re afraid, you bully, you’re afraid, you know
you are.’

The dog tore and strained at his chain with starting eyes and furious
bark, but there the dwarf lay, snapping his fingers with gestures of
defiance and contempt.  When he had sufficiently recovered from his
delight, he rose, and with his arms a-kimbo, achieved a kind of
demon-dance round the kennel, just without the limits of the chain,
driving the dog quite wild.  Having by this means composed his spirits
and put himself in a pleasant train, he returned to his unsuspicious
companion, whom he found looking at the tide with exceeding gravity,
and thinking of that same gold and silver which Mr Quilp had mentioned.




CHAPTER 22

The remainder of that day and the whole of the next were a busy time
for the Nubbles family, to whom everything connected with Kit’s outfit
and departure was matter of as great moment as if he had been about to
penetrate into the interior of Africa, or to take a cruise round the
world.  It would be difficult to suppose that there ever was a box
which was opened and shut so many times within four-and-twenty hours,
as that which contained his wardrobe and necessaries; and certainly
there never was one which to two small eyes presented such a mine of
clothing, as this mighty chest with its three shirts and proportionate
allowance of stockings and pocket-handkerchiefs, disclosed to the
astonished vision of little Jacob.  At last it was conveyed to the
carrier’s, at whose house at Finchley Kit was to find it next day; and
the box being gone, there remained but two questions for consideration:
firstly, whether the carrier would lose, or dishonestly feign to lose,
the box upon the road; secondly, whether Kit’s mother perfectly
understood how to take care of herself in the absence of her son.

‘I don’t think there’s hardly a chance of his really losing it, but
carriers are under great temptation to pretend they lose things, no
doubt,’ said Mrs Nubbles apprehensively, in reference to the first
point.

‘No doubt about it,’ returned Kit, with a serious look; ‘upon my word,
mother, I don’t think it was right to trust it to itself.  Somebody
ought to have gone with it, I’m afraid.’

‘We can’t help it now,’ said his mother; ‘but it was foolish and wrong.
People oughtn’t to be tempted.’

Kit inwardly resolved that he would never tempt a carrier any more,
save with an empty box; and having formed this Christian determination,
he turned his thoughts to the second question.

‘_You_ know you must keep up your spirits, mother, and not be lonesome
because I’m not at home.  I shall very often be able to look in when I
come into town I dare say, and I shall send you a letter sometimes, and
when the quarter comes round, I can get a holiday of course; and then
see if we don’t take little Jacob to the play, and let him know what
oysters means.’

‘I hope plays mayn’t be sinful, Kit, but I’m a’most afraid,’ said Mrs
Nubbles.

‘I know who has been putting that in your head,’ rejoined her son
disconsolately; ‘that’s Little Bethel again.  Now I say, mother, pray
don’t take to going there regularly, for if I was to see your
good-humoured face that has always made home cheerful, turned into a
grievous one, and the baby trained to look grievous too, and to call
itself a young sinner (bless its heart) and a child of the devil (which
is calling its dead father names); if I was to see this, and see little
Jacob looking grievous likewise, I should so take it to heart that I’m
sure I should go and list for a soldier, and run my head on purpose
against the first cannon-ball I saw coming my way.’

‘Oh, Kit, don’t talk like that.’

‘I would, indeed, mother, and unless you want to make me feel very
wretched and uncomfortable, you’ll keep that bow on your bonnet, which
you’d more than half a mind to pull off last week.  Can you suppose
there’s any harm in looking as cheerful and being as cheerful as our
poor circumstances will permit?  Do I see anything in the way I’m made,
which calls upon me to be a snivelling, solemn, whispering chap,
sneaking about as if I couldn’t help it, and expressing myself in a
most unpleasant snuffle?  on the contrary, don’t I see every reason why
I shouldn’t?  just hear this!  Ha ha ha!  An’t that as nat’ral as
walking, and as good for the health?  Ha ha ha!  An’t that as nat’ral
as a sheep’s bleating, or a pig’s grunting, or a horse’s neighing, or a
bird’s singing?  Ha ha ha!  Isn’t it, mother?’

There was something contagious in Kit’s laugh, for his mother, who had
looked grave before, first subsided into a smile, and then fell to
joining in it heartily, which occasioned Kit to say that he knew it was
natural, and to laugh the more.  Kit and his mother, laughing together
in a pretty loud key, woke the baby, who, finding that there was
something very jovial and agreeable in progress, was no sooner in its
mother’s arms than it began to kick and laugh, most vigorously.  This
new illustration of his argument so tickled Kit, that he fell backward
in his chair in a state of exhaustion, pointing at the baby and shaking
his sides till he rocked again.  After recovering twice or thrice, and
as often relapsing, he wiped his eyes and said grace; and a very
cheerful meal their scanty supper was.

With more kisses, and hugs, and tears, than many young gentlemen who
start upon their travels, and leave well-stocked homes behind them,
would deem within the bounds of probability (if matter so low could be
herein set down), Kit left the house at an early hour next morning, and
set out to walk to Finchley; feeling a sufficient pride in his
appearance to have warranted his excommunication from Little Bethel
from that time forth, if he had ever been one of that mournful
congregation.

Lest anybody should feel a curiosity to know how Kit was clad, it may
be briefly remarked that he wore no livery, but was dressed in a coat
of pepper-and-salt with waistcoat of canary colour, and nether garments
of iron-grey; besides these glories, he shone in the lustre of a new
pair of boots and an extremely stiff and shiny hat, which on being
struck anywhere with the knuckles, sounded like a drum.  And in this
attire, rather wondering that he attracted so little attention, and
attributing the circumstance to the insensibility of those who got up
early, he made his way towards Abel Cottage.

Without encountering any more remarkable adventure on the road, than
meeting a lad in a brimless hat, the exact counterpart of his old one,
on whom he bestowed half the sixpence he possessed, Kit arrived in
course of time at the carrier’s house, where, to the lasting honour of
human nature, he found the box in safety.  Receiving from the wife of
this immaculate man, a direction to Mr Garland’s, he took the box upon
his shoulder and repaired thither directly.

To be sure, it was a beautiful little cottage with a thatched roof and
little spires at the gable-ends, and pieces of stained glass in some of
the windows, almost as large as pocket-books.  On one side of the house
was a little stable, just the size for the pony, with a little room
over it, just the size for Kit.  White curtains were fluttering, and
birds in cages that looked as bright as if they were made of gold, were
singing at the windows; plants were arranged on either side of the
path, and clustered about the door; and the garden was bright with
flowers in full bloom, which shed a sweet odour all round, and had a
charming and elegant appearance.  Everything within the house and
without, seemed to be the perfection of neatness and order.  In the
garden there was not a weed to be seen, and to judge from some dapper
gardening-tools, a basket, and a pair of gloves which were lying in one
of the walks, old Mr Garland had been at work in it that very morning.

Kit looked about him, and admired, and looked again, and this a great
many times before he could make up his mind to turn his head another
way and ring the bell.  There was abundance of time to look about him
again though, when he had rung it, for nobody came, so after ringing it
twice or thrice he sat down upon his box, and waited.

He rang the bell a great many times, and yet nobody came.  But at last,
as he was sitting upon the box thinking about giants’ castles, and
princesses tied up to pegs by the hair of their heads, and dragons
bursting out from behind gates, and other incidents of the like nature,
common in story-books to youths of low degree on their first visit to
strange houses, the door was gently opened, and a little servant-girl,
very tidy, modest, and demure, but very pretty too, appeared.

‘I suppose you’re Christopher, sir,’ said the servant-girl.

Kit got off the box, and said yes, he was.

‘I’m afraid you’ve rung a good many times perhaps,’ she rejoined, ‘but
we couldn’t hear you, because we’ve been catching the pony.’

Kit rather wondered what this meant, but as he couldn’t stop there,
asking questions, he shouldered the box again and followed the girl
into the hall, where through a back-door he descried Mr Garland leading
Whisker in triumph up the garden, after that self-willed pony had (as
he afterwards learned) dodged the family round a small paddock in the
rear, for one hour and three quarters.

The old gentleman received him very kindly and so did the old lady,
whose previous good opinion of him was greatly enhanced by his wiping
his boots on the mat until the soles of his feet burnt again.  He was
then taken into the parlour to be inspected in his new clothes; and
when he had been surveyed several times, and had afforded by his
appearance unlimited satisfaction, he was taken into the stable (where
the pony received him with uncommon complaisance); and thence into the
little chamber he had already observed, which was very clean and
comfortable: and thence into the garden, in which the old gentleman
told him he would be taught to employ himself, and where he told him,
besides, what great things he meant to do to make him comfortable, and
happy, if he found he deserved it.  All these kindnesses, Kit
acknowledged with various expressions of gratitude, and so many touches
of the new hat, that the brim suffered considerably.  When the old
gentleman had said all he had to say in the way of promise and advice,
and Kit had said all he had to say in the way of assurance and
thankfulness, he was handed over again to the old lady, who, summoning
the little servant-girl (whose name was Barbara) instructed her to take
him down stairs and give him something to eat and drink, after his walk.

Down stairs, therefore, Kit went; and at the bottom of the stairs there
was such a kitchen as was never before seen or heard of out of a
toy-shop window, with everything in it as bright and glowing, and as
precisely ordered too, as Barbara herself.  And in this kitchen, Kit
sat himself down at a table as white as a tablecloth, to eat cold meat,
and drink small ale, and use his knife and fork the more awkwardly,
because there was an unknown Barbara looking on and observing him.

It did not appear, however, that there was anything remarkably
tremendous about this strange Barbara, who having lived a very quiet
life, blushed very much and was quite as embarrassed and uncertain what
she ought to say or do, as Kit could possibly be.  When he had sat for
some little time, attentive to the ticking of the sober clock, he
ventured to glance curiously at the dresser, and there, among the
plates and dishes, were Barbara’s little work-box with a sliding lid to
shut in the balls of cotton, and Barbara’s prayer-book, and Barbara’s
hymn-book, and Barbara’s Bible.  Barbara’s little looking-glass hung in
a good light near the window, and Barbara’s bonnet was on a nail behind
the door.  From all these mute signs and tokens of her presence, he
naturally glanced at Barbara herself, who sat as mute as they, shelling
peas into a dish; and just when Kit was looking at her eyelashes and
wondering--quite in the simplicity of his heart--what colour her eyes
might be, it perversely happened that Barbara raised her head a little
to look at him, when both pair of eyes were hastily withdrawn, and Kit
leant over his plate, and Barbara over her pea-shells, each in extreme
confusion at having been detected by the other.




CHAPTER 23

Mr Richard Swiveller wending homeward from the Wilderness (for such was
the appropriate name of Quilp’s choice retreat), after a sinuous and
corkscrew fashion, with many checks and stumbles; after stopping
suddenly and staring about him, then as suddenly running forward for a
few paces, and as suddenly halting again and shaking his head; doing
everything with a jerk and nothing by premeditation;--Mr Richard
Swiveller wending his way homeward after this fashion, which is
considered by evil-minded men to be symbolical of intoxication, and is
not held by such persons to denote that state of deep wisdom and
reflection in which the actor knows himself to be, began to think that
possibly he had misplaced his confidence and that the dwarf might not
be precisely the sort of person to whom to entrust a secret of such
delicacy and importance.  And being led and tempted on by this
remorseful thought into a condition which the evil-minded class before
referred to would term the maudlin state or stage of drunkenness, it
occurred to Mr Swiveller to cast his hat upon the ground, and moan,
crying aloud that he was an unhappy orphan, and that if he had not been
an unhappy orphan things had never come to this.

‘Left an infant by my parents, at an early age,’ said Mr Swiveller,
bewailing his hard lot, ‘cast upon the world in my tenderest period,
and thrown upon the mercies of a deluding dwarf, who can wonder at my
weakness!  Here’s a miserable orphan for you.  Here,’ said Mr Swiveller
raising his voice to a high pitch, and looking sleepily round, ‘is a
miserable orphan!’

‘Then,’ said somebody hard by, ‘let me be a father to you.’

Mr Swiveller swayed himself to and fro to preserve his balance, and,
looking into a kind of haze which seemed to surround him, at last
perceived two eyes dimly twinkling through the mist, which he observed
after a short time were in the neighbourhood of a nose and mouth.
Casting his eyes down towards that quarter in which, with reference to
a man’s face, his legs are usually to be found, he observed that the
face had a body attached; and when he looked more intently he was
satisfied that the person was Mr Quilp, who indeed had been in his
company all the time, but whom he had some vague idea of having left a
mile or two behind.

‘You have deceived an orphan, Sir,’ said Mr Swiveller solemnly.’

‘I!  I’m a second father to you,’ replied Quilp.

‘You my father, Sir!’ retorted Dick.  ‘Being all right myself, Sir, I
request to be left alone--instantly, Sir.’

‘What a funny fellow you are!’ cried Quilp.

‘Go, Sir,’ returned Dick, leaning against a post and waving his hand.
‘Go, deceiver, go, some day, Sir, p’r’aps you’ll waken, from pleasure’s
dream to know, the grief of orphans forsaken.  Will you go, Sir?’

The dwarf taking no heed of this adjuration, Mr Swiveller advanced with
the view of inflicting upon him condign chastisement.  But forgetting
his purpose or changing his mind before he came close to him, he seized
his hand and vowed eternal friendship, declaring with an agreeable
frankness that from that time forth they were brothers in everything
but personal appearance.  Then he told his secret over again, with the
addition of being pathetic on the subject of Miss Wackles, who, he gave
Mr Quilp to understand, was the occasion of any slight incoherency he
might observe in his speech at that moment, which was attributable
solely to the strength of his affection and not to rosy wine or other
fermented liquor.  And then they went on arm-in-arm, very lovingly
together.

‘I’m as sharp,’ said Quilp to him, at parting, ‘as sharp as a ferret,
and as cunning as a weazel.  You bring Trent to me; assure him that I’m
his friend though I fear he a little distrusts me (I don’t know why, I
have not deserved it); and you’ve both of you made your fortunes--in
perspective.’

‘That’s the worst of it,’ returned Dick.  ‘These fortunes in
perspective look such a long way off.’

‘But they look smaller than they really are, on that account,’ said
Quilp, pressing his arm.  ‘You’ll have no conception of the value of
your prize until you draw close to it.  Mark that.’

‘D’ye think not?’ said Dick.

‘Aye, I do; and I am certain of what I say, that’s better,’ returned
the dwarf.  ‘You bring Trent to me.  Tell him I am his friend and
yours--why shouldn’t I be?’

‘There’s no reason why you shouldn’t, certainly,’ replied Dick, ‘and
perhaps there are a great many why you should--at least there would be
nothing strange in your wanting to be my friend, if you were a choice
spirit, but then you know you’re not a choice spirit.’

‘I not a choice spirit?’ cried Quilp.

‘Devil a bit, sir,’ returned Dick.  ‘A man of your appearance couldn’t
be.  If you’re any spirit at all, sir, you’re an evil spirit.  Choice
spirits,’ added Dick, smiting himself on the breast, ‘are quite a
different looking sort of people, you may take your oath of that, sir.’

Quilp glanced at his free-spoken friend with a mingled expression of
cunning and dislike, and wringing his hand almost at the same moment,
declared that he was an uncommon character and had his warmest esteem.
With that they parted; Mr Swiveller to make the best of his way home
and sleep himself sober; and Quilp to cogitate upon the discovery he
had made, and exult in the prospect of the rich field of enjoyment and
reprisal it opened to him.

It was not without great reluctance and misgiving that Mr Swiveller,
next morning, his head racked by the fumes of the renowned Schiedam,
repaired to the lodging of his friend Trent (which was in the roof of
an old house in an old ghostly inn), and recounted by very slow degrees
what had yesterday taken place between him and Quilp.  Nor was it
without great surprise and much speculation on Quilp’s probable
motives, nor without many bitter comments on Dick Swiveller’s folly,
that his friend received the tale.

‘I don’t defend myself, Fred,’ said the penitent Richard; ‘but the
fellow has such a queer way with him and is such an artful dog, that
first of all he set me upon thinking whether there was any harm in
telling him, and while I was thinking, screwed it out of me.  If you
had seen him drink and smoke, as I did, you couldn’t have kept anything
from him.  He’s a Salamander you know, that’s what he is.’

Without inquiring whether Salamanders were of necessity good
confidential agents, or whether a fire-proof man was as a matter of
course trustworthy, Frederick Trent threw himself into a chair, and,
burying his head in his hands, endeavoured to fathom the motives which
had led Quilp to insinuate himself into Richard Swiveller’s
confidence;--for that the disclosure was of his seeking, and had not
been spontaneously revealed by Dick, was sufficiently plain from
Quilp’s seeking his company and enticing him away.

The dwarf had twice encountered him when he was endeavouring to obtain
intelligence of the fugitives.  This, perhaps, as he had not shown any
previous anxiety about them, was enough to awaken suspicion in the
breast of a creature so jealous and distrustful by nature, setting
aside any additional impulse to curiosity that he might have derived
from Dick’s incautious manner.  But knowing the scheme they had
planned, why should he offer to assist it?  This was a question more
difficult of solution; but as knaves generally overreach themselves by
imputing their own designs to others, the idea immediately presented
itself that some circumstances of irritation between Quilp and the old
man, arising out of their secret transactions and not unconnected
perhaps with his sudden disappearance, now rendered the former desirous
of revenging himself upon him by seeking to entrap the sole object of
his love and anxiety into a connexion of which he knew he had a dread
and hatred.  As Frederick Trent himself, utterly regardless of his
sister, had this object at heart, only second to the hope of gain, it
seemed to him the more likely to be Quilp’s main principle of action.
Once investing the dwarf with a design of his own in abetting them,
which the attainment of their purpose would serve, it was easy to
believe him sincere and hearty in the cause; and as there could be no
doubt of his proving a powerful and useful auxiliary, Trent determined
to accept his invitation and go to his house that night, and if what he
said and did confirmed him in the impression he had formed, to let him
share the labour of their plan, but not the profit.

Having revolved these things in his mind and arrived at this
conclusion, he communicated to Mr Swiveller as much of his meditations
as he thought proper (Dick would have been perfectly satisfied with
less), and giving him the day to recover himself from his late
salamandering, accompanied him at evening to Mr Quilp’s house.

Mighty glad Mr Quilp was to see them, or mightily glad he seemed to be;
and fearfully polite Mr Quilp was to Mrs Quilp and Mrs Jiniwin; and
very sharp was the look he cast on his wife to observe how she was
affected by the recognition of young Trent.  Mrs Quilp was as innocent
as her own mother of any emotion, painful or pleasant, which the sight
of him awakened, but as her husband’s glance made her timid and
confused, and uncertain what to do or what was required of her, Mr
Quilp did not fail to assign her embarrassment to the cause he had in
his mind, and while he chuckled at his penetration was secretly
exasperated by his jealousy.

Nothing of this appeared, however.  On the contrary, Mr Quilp was all
blandness and suavity, and presided over the case-bottle of rum with
extraordinary open-heartedness.

‘Why, let me see,’ said Quilp.  ‘It must be a matter of nearly two
years since we were first acquainted.’

‘Nearer three, I think,’ said Trent.

‘Nearer three!’ cried Quilp.  ‘How fast time flies.  Does it seem as
long as that to you, Mrs Quilp?’

‘Yes, I think it seems full three years, Quilp,’ was the unfortunate
reply.

‘Oh indeed, ma’am,’ thought Quilp, ‘you have been pining, have you?
Very good, ma’am.’

‘It seems to me but yesterday that you went out to Demerara in the Mary
Anne,’ said Quilp; ‘but yesterday, I declare.  Well, I like a little
wildness.  I was wild myself once.’

Mr Quilp accompanied this admission with such an awful wink, indicative
of old rovings and backslidings, that Mrs Jiniwin was indignant, and
could not forbear from remarking under her breath that he might at
least put off his confessions until his wife was absent; for which act
of boldness and insubordination Mr Quilp first stared her out of
countenance and then drank her health ceremoniously.

‘I thought you’d come back directly, Fred.  I always thought that,’
said Quilp setting down his glass.  ‘And when the Mary Anne returned
with you on board, instead of a letter to say what a contrite heart you
had, and how happy you were in the situation that had been provided for
you, I was amused--exceedingly amused.  Ha ha ha!’

The young man smiled, but not as though the theme was the most
agreeable one that could have been selected for his entertainment; and
for that reason Quilp pursued it.

‘I always will say,’ he resumed, ‘that when a rich relation having two
young people--sisters or brothers, or brother and sister--dependent on
him, attaches himself exclusively to one, and casts off the other, he
does wrong.’

The young man made a movement of impatience, but Quilp went on as
calmly as if he were discussing some abstract question in which nobody
present had the slightest personal interest.

‘It’s very true,’ said Quilp, ‘that your grandfather urged repeated
forgiveness, ingratitude, riot, and extravagance, and all that; but as
I told him “these are common faults.”  “But he’s a scoundrel,” said he.
“Granting that,” said I (for the sake of argument of course), “a great
many young noblemen and gentlemen are scoundrels too!” But he wouldn’t
be convinced.’

‘I wonder at that, Mr Quilp,’ said the young man sarcastically.

‘Well, so did I at the time,’ returned Quilp, ‘but he was always
obstinate.  He was in a manner a friend of mine, but he was always
obstinate and wrong-headed.  Little Nell is a nice girl, a charming
girl, but you’re her brother, Frederick.  You’re her brother after all;
as you told him the last time you met, he can’t alter that.’

‘He would if he could, confound him for that and all other kindnesses,’
said the young man impatiently.  ‘But nothing can come of this subject
now, and let us have done with it in the Devil’s name.’

‘Agreed,’ returned Quilp, ‘agreed on my part readily.  Why have I
alluded to it?  Just to show you, Frederick, that I have always stood
your friend.  You little knew who was your friend, and who your foe;
now did you?  You thought I was against you, and so there has been a
coolness between us; but it was all on your side, entirely on your
side.  Let’s shake hands again, Fred.’

With his head sunk down between his shoulders, and a hideous grin
over-spreading his face, the dwarf stood up and stretched his short arm
across the table.  After a moment’s hesitation, the young man stretched
out his to meet it; Quilp clutched his fingers in a grip that for the
moment stopped the current of the blood within them, and pressing his
other hand upon his lip and frowning towards the unsuspicious Richard,
released them and sat down.

This action was not lost upon Trent, who, knowing that Richard
Swiveller was a mere tool in his hands and knew no more of his designs
than he thought proper to communicate, saw that the dwarf perfectly
understood their relative position, and fully entered into the
character of his friend.  It is something to be appreciated, even in
knavery.  This silent homage to his superior abilities, no less than a
sense of the power with which the dwarf’s quick perception had already
invested him, inclined the young man towards that ugly worthy, and
determined him to profit by his aid.

It being now Mr Quilp’s cue to change the subject with all convenient
expedition, lest Richard Swiveller in his heedlessness should reveal
anything which it was inexpedient for the women to know, he proposed a
game at four-handed cribbage, and partners being cut for, Mrs Quilp
fell to Frederick Trent, and Dick himself to Quilp.  Mrs Jiniwin being
very fond of cards was carefully excluded by her son-in-law from any
participation in the game, and had assigned to her the duty of
occasionally replenishing the glasses from the case-bottle; Mr Quilp
from that moment keeping one eye constantly upon her, lest she should
by any means procure a taste of the same, and thereby tantalising the
wretched old lady (who was as much attached to the case-bottle as the
cards) in a double degree and most ingenious manner.

But it was not to Mrs Jiniwin alone that Mr Quilp’s attention was
restricted, as several other matters required his constant vigilance.
Among his various eccentric habits he had a humorous one of always
cheating at cards, which rendered necessary on his part, not only a
close observance of the game, and a sleight-of-hand in counting and
scoring, but also involved the constant correction, by looks, and
frowns, and kicks under the table, of Richard Swiveller, who being
bewildered by the rapidity with which his cards were told, and the rate
at which the pegs travelled down the board, could not be prevented from
sometimes expressing his surprise and incredulity.  Mrs Quilp too was
the partner of young Trent, and for every look that passed between
them, and every word they spoke, and every card they played, the dwarf
had eyes and ears; not occupied alone with what was passing above the
table, but with signals that might be exchanging beneath it, which he
laid all kinds of traps to detect; besides often treading on his wife’s
toes to see whether she cried out or remained silent under the
infliction, in which latter case it would have been quite clear that
Trent had been treading on her toes before.  Yet, in the most of all
these distractions, the one eye was upon the old lady always, and if
she so much as stealthily advanced a tea-spoon towards a neighbouring
glass (which she often did), for the purpose of abstracting but one sup
of its sweet contents, Quilp’s hand would overset it in the very moment
of her triumph, and Quilp’s mocking voice implore her to regard her
precious health.  And in any one of these his many cares, from first to
last, Quilp never flagged nor faltered.

At length, when they had played a great many rubbers and drawn pretty
freely upon the case-bottle, Mr Quilp warned his lady to retire to
rest, and that submissive wife complying, and being followed by her
indignant mother, Mr Swiveller fell asleep.  The dwarf beckoning his
remaining companion to the other end of the room, held a short
conference with him in whispers.

‘It’s as well not to say more than one can help before our worthy
friend,’ said Quilp, making a grimace towards the slumbering Dick.  ‘Is
it a bargain between us, Fred?  Shall he marry little rosy Nell
by-and-by?’

‘You have some end of your own to answer, of course,’ returned the
other.

‘Of course I have, dear Fred,’ said Quilp, grinning to think how little
he suspected what the real end was.  ‘It’s retaliation perhaps; perhaps
whim.  I have influence, Fred, to help or oppose.  Which way shall I
use it?  There are a pair of scales, and it goes into one.’

‘Throw it into mine then,’ said Trent.

‘It’s done, Fred,’ rejoined Quilp, stretching out his clenched hand and
opening it as if he had let some weight fall out.  ‘It’s in the scale
from this time, and turns it, Fred.  Mind that.’

‘Where have they gone?’ asked Trent.

Quilp shook his head, and said that point remained to be discovered,
which it might be, easily.  When it was, they would begin their
preliminary advances.  He would visit the old man, or even Richard
Swiveller might visit him, and by affecting a deep concern in his
behalf, and imploring him to settle in some worthy home, lead to the
child’s remembering him with gratitude and favour.  Once impressed to
this extent, it would be easy, he said, to win her in a year or two,
for she supposed the old man to be poor, as it was a part of his
jealous policy (in common with many other misers) to feign to be so, to
those about him.

‘He has feigned it often enough to me, of late,’ said Trent.

‘Oh! and to me too!’ replied the dwarf.  ‘Which is more extraordinary,
as I know how rich he really is.’

‘I suppose you should,’ said Trent.

‘I think I should indeed,’ rejoined the dwarf; and in that, at least,
he spoke the truth.

After a few more whispered words, they returned to the table, and the
young man rousing Richard Swiveller informed him that he was waiting to
depart.  This was welcome news to Dick, who started up directly.  After
a few words of confidence in the result of their project had been
exchanged, they bade the grinning Quilp good night.

Quilp crept to the window as they passed in the street below, and
listened.  Trent was pronouncing an encomium upon his wife, and they
were both wondering by what enchantment she had been brought to marry
such a misshapen wretch as he.  The dwarf after watching their
retreating shadows with a wider grin than his face had yet displayed,
stole softly in the dark to bed.

In this hatching of their scheme, neither Trent nor Quilp had had one
thought about the happiness or misery of poor innocent Nell.  It would
have been strange if the careless profligate, who was the butt of both,
had been harassed by any such consideration; for his high opinion of
his own merits and deserts rendered the project rather a laudable one
than otherwise; and if he had been visited by so unwonted a guest as
reflection, he would--being a brute only in the gratification of his
appetites--have soothed his conscience with the plea that he did not
mean to beat or kill his wife, and would therefore, after all said and
done, be a very tolerable, average husband.




CHAPTER 24

It was not until they were quite exhausted and could no longer maintain
the pace at which they had fled from the race-ground, that the old man
and the child ventured to stop, and sit down to rest upon the borders
of a little wood.  Here, though the course was hidden from their view,
they could yet faintly distinguish the noise of distant shouts, the hum
of voices, and the beating of drums.  Climbing the eminence which lay
between them and the spot they had left, the child could even discern
the fluttering flags and white tops of booths; but no person was
approaching towards them, and their resting-place was solitary and
still.

Some time elapsed before she could reassure her trembling companion, or
restore him to a state of moderate tranquillity.  His disordered
imagination represented to him a crowd of persons stealing towards them
beneath the cover of the bushes, lurking in every ditch, and peeping
from the boughs of every rustling tree.  He was haunted by
apprehensions of being led captive to some gloomy place where he would
be chained and scourged, and worse than all, where Nell could never
come to see him, save through iron bars and gratings in the wall.  His
terrors affected the child.  Separation from her grandfather was the
greatest evil she could dread; and feeling for the time as though, go
where they would, they were to be hunted down, and could never be safe
but in hiding, her heart failed her, and her courage drooped.

In one so young, and so unused to the scenes in which she had lately
moved, this sinking of the spirit was not surprising.  But, Nature
often enshrines gallant and noble hearts in weak bosoms--oftenest, God
bless her, in female breasts--and when the child, casting her tearful
eyes upon the old man, remembered how weak he was, and how destitute
and helpless he would be if she failed him, her heart swelled within
her, and animated her with new strength and fortitude.

‘We are quite safe now, and have nothing to fear indeed, dear
grandfather,’ she said.

‘Nothing to fear!’ returned the old man.  ‘Nothing to fear if they took
me from thee!  Nothing to fear if they parted us!  Nobody is true to
me.  No, not one.  Not even Nell!’

‘Oh! do not say that,’ replied the child, ‘for if ever anybody was true
at heart, and earnest, I am.  I am sure you know I am.’

‘Then how,’ said the old man, looking fearfully round, ‘how can you
bear to think that we are safe, when they are searching for me
everywhere, and may come here, and steal upon us, even while we’re
talking?’

‘Because I’m sure we have not been followed,’ said the child.  ‘Judge
for yourself, dear grandfather: look round, and see how quiet and still
it is.  We are alone together, and may ramble where we like.  Not safe!
Could I feel easy--did I feel at ease--when any danger threatened you?’

‘True, too,’ he answered, pressing her hand, but still looking
anxiously about.  ‘What noise was that?’

‘A bird,’ said the child, ‘flying into the wood, and leading the way
for us to follow.’  You remember that we said we would walk in woods
and fields, and by the side of rivers, and how happy we would be--you
remember that?  But here, while the sun shines above our heads, and
everything is bright and happy, we are sitting sadly down, and losing
time.  See what a pleasant path; and there’s the bird--the same
bird--now he flies to another tree, and stays to sing.  Come!’

When they rose up from the ground, and took the shady track which led
them through the wood, she bounded on before, printing her tiny
footsteps in the moss, which rose elastic from so light a pressure and
gave it back as mirrors throw off breath; and thus she lured the old
man on, with many a backward look and merry beck, now pointing
stealthily to some lone bird as it perched and twittered on a branch
that strayed across their path, now stopping to listen to the songs
that broke the happy silence, or watch the sun as it trembled through
the leaves, and stealing in among the ivied trunks of stout old trees,
opened long paths of light.  As they passed onward, parting the boughs
that clustered in their way, the serenity which the child had first
assumed, stole into her breast in earnest; the old man cast no longer
fearful looks behind, but felt at ease and cheerful, for the further
they passed into the deep green shade, the more they felt that the
tranquil mind of God was there, and shed its peace on them.

At length the path becoming clearer and less intricate, brought them to
the end of the wood, and into a public road.  Taking their way along it
for a short distance, they came to a lane, so shaded by the trees on
either hand that they met together over-head, and arched the narrow
way.  A broken finger-post announced that this led to a village three
miles off; and thither they resolved to bend their steps.

The miles appeared so long that they sometimes thought they must have
missed their road.  But at last, to their great joy, it led downwards
in a steep descent, with overhanging banks over which the footpaths
led; and the clustered houses of the village peeped from the woody
hollow below.

It was a very small place.  The men and boys were playing at cricket on
the green; and as the other folks were looking on, they wandered up and
down, uncertain where to seek a humble lodging.  There was but one old
man in the little garden before his cottage, and him they were timid of
approaching, for he was the schoolmaster, and had ‘School’ written up
over his window in black letters on a white board.  He was a pale,
simple-looking man, of a spare and meagre habit, and sat among his
flowers and beehives, smoking his pipe, in the little porch before his
door.

‘Speak to him, dear,’ the old man whispered.

‘I am almost afraid to disturb him,’ said the child timidly.  ‘He does
not seem to see us.  Perhaps if we wait a little, he may look this way.’

They waited, but the schoolmaster cast no look towards them, and still
sat, thoughtful and silent, in the little porch.  He had a kind face.
In his plain old suit of black, he looked pale and meagre.  They
fancied, too, a lonely air about him and his house, but perhaps that
was because the other people formed a merry company upon the green, and
he seemed the only solitary man in all the place.

They were very tired, and the child would have been bold enough to
address even a schoolmaster, but for something in his manner which
seemed to denote that he was uneasy or distressed.  As they stood
hesitating at a little distance, they saw that he sat for a few minutes
at a time like one in a brown study, then laid aside his pipe and took
a few turns in his garden, then approached the gate and looked towards
the green, then took up his pipe again with a sigh, and sat down
thoughtfully as before.

As nobody else appeared and it would soon be dark, Nell at length took
courage, and when he had resumed his pipe and seat, ventured to draw
near, leading her grandfather by the hand.  The slight noise they made
in raising the latch of the wicket-gate, caught his attention.  He
looked at them kindly but seemed disappointed too, and slightly shook
his head.

Nell dropped a curtsey, and told him they were poor travellers who
sought a shelter for the night which they would gladly pay for, so far
as their means allowed.  The schoolmaster looked earnestly at her as
she spoke, laid aside his pipe, and rose up directly.

‘If you could direct us anywhere, sir,’ said the child, ‘we should take
it very kindly.’

‘You have been walking a long way,’ said the schoolmaster.

‘A long way, Sir,’ the child replied.

‘You’re a young traveller, my child,’ he said, laying his hand gently
on her head.  ‘Your grandchild, friend?’

‘Aye, Sir,’ cried the old man, ‘and the stay and comfort of my life.’

‘Come in,’ said the schoolmaster.

Without further preface he conducted them into his little school-room,
which was parlour and kitchen likewise, and told them that they were
welcome to remain under his roof till morning.  Before they had done
thanking him, he spread a coarse white cloth upon the table, with
knives and platters; and bringing out some bread and cold meat and a
jug of beer, besought them to eat and drink.

The child looked round the room as she took her seat.  There were a
couple of forms, notched and cut and inked all over; a small deal desk
perched on four legs, at which no doubt the master sat; a few
dog’s-eared books upon a high shelf; and beside them a motley
collection of peg-tops, balls, kites, fishing-lines, marbles,
half-eaten apples, and other confiscated property of idle urchins.
Displayed on hooks upon the wall in all their terrors, were the cane
and ruler; and near them, on a small shelf of its own, the dunce’s cap,
made of old newspapers and decorated with glaring wafers of the largest
size.  But, the great ornaments of the walls were certain moral
sentences fairly copied in good round text, and well-worked sums in
simple addition and multiplication, evidently achieved by the same
hand, which were plentifully pasted all round the room: for the double
purpose, as it seemed, of bearing testimony to the excellence of the
school, and kindling a worthy emulation in the bosoms of the scholars.

‘Yes,’ said the old schoolmaster, observing that her attention was
caught by these latter specimens.  ‘That’s beautiful writing, my dear.’

‘Very, Sir,’ replied the child modestly, ‘is it yours?’

‘Mine!’ he returned, taking out his spectacles and putting them on, to
have a better view of the triumphs so dear to his heart.  ‘I couldn’t
write like that, now-a-days.  No.  They’re all done by one hand; a
little hand it is, not so old as yours, but a very clever one.’

As the schoolmaster said this, he saw that a small blot of ink had been
thrown on one of the copies, so he took a penknife from his pocket, and
going up to the wall, carefully scraped it out.  When he had finished,
he walked slowly backward from the writing, admiring it as one might
contemplate a beautiful picture, but with something of sadness in his
voice and manner which quite touched the child, though she was
unacquainted with its cause.

‘A little hand indeed,’ said the poor schoolmaster.  ‘Far beyond all
his companions, in his learning and his sports too, how did he ever
come to be so fond of me!  That I should love him is no wonder, but
that he should love me--’ and there the schoolmaster stopped, and took
off his spectacles to wipe them, as though they had grown dim.

‘I hope there is nothing the matter, sir,’ said Nell anxiously.

‘Not much, my dear,’ returned the schoolmaster.  ‘I hoped to have seen
him on the green to-night.  He was always foremost among them.  But
he’ll be there to-morrow.’

‘Has he been ill?’ asked the child, with a child’s quick sympathy.

‘Not very.  They said he was wandering in his head yesterday, dear boy,
and so they said the day before.  But that’s a part of that kind of
disorder; it’s not a bad sign--not at all a bad sign.’

The child was silent.  He walked to the door, and looked wistfully out.
The shadows of night were gathering, and all was still.

‘If he could lean upon anybody’s arm, he would come to me, I know,’ he
said, returning into the room.  ‘He always came into the garden to say
good night.  But perhaps his illness has only just taken a favourable
turn, and it’s too late for him to come out, for it’s very damp and
there’s a heavy dew.  It’s much better he shouldn’t come to-night.’

The schoolmaster lighted a candle, fastened the window-shutter, and
closed the door.  But after he had done this, and sat silent a little
time, he took down his hat, and said he would go and satisfy himself,
if Nell would sit up till he returned.  The child readily complied, and
he went out.

She sat there half-an-hour or more, feeling the place very strange and
lonely, for she had prevailed upon the old man to go to bed, and there
was nothing to be heard but the ticking of an old clock, and the
whistling of the wind among the trees.  When he returned, he took his
seat in the chimney corner, but remained silent for a long time.  At
length he turned to her, and speaking very gently, hoped she would say
a prayer that night for a sick child.

‘My favourite scholar!’ said the poor schoolmaster, smoking a pipe he
had forgotten to light, and looking mournfully round upon the walls.
‘It is a little hand to have done all that, and waste away with
sickness.  It is a very, very little hand!’




CHAPTER 25

After a sound night’s rest in a chamber in the thatched roof, in which
it seemed the sexton had for some years been a lodger, but which he had
lately deserted for a wife and a cottage of his own, the child rose
early in the morning and descended to the room where she had supped
last night.  As the schoolmaster had already left his bed and gone out,
she bestirred herself to make it neat and comfortable, and had just
finished its arrangement when the kind host returned.

He thanked her many times, and said that the old dame who usually did
such offices for him had gone to nurse the little scholar whom he had
told her of.  The child asked how he was, and hoped he was better.

‘No,’ rejoined the schoolmaster shaking his head sorrowfully, ‘no
better.  They even say he is worse.’

‘I am very sorry for that, Sir,’ said the child.

The poor schoolmaster appeared to be gratified by her earnest manner,
but yet rendered more uneasy by it, for he added hastily that anxious
people often magnified an evil and thought it greater than it was; ‘for
my part,’ he said, in his quiet, patient way, ‘I hope it’s not so.  I
don’t think he can be worse.’

The child asked his leave to prepare breakfast, and her grandfather
coming down stairs, they all three partook of it together.  While the
meal was in progress, their host remarked that the old man seemed much
fatigued, and evidently stood in need of rest.

‘If the journey you have before you is a long one,’ he said, ‘and don’t
press you for one day, you’re very welcome to pass another night here.
I should really be glad if you would, friend.’

He saw that the old man looked at Nell, uncertain whether to accept or
decline his offer; and added,

‘I shall be glad to have your young companion with me for one day.  If
you can do a charity to a lone man, and rest yourself at the same time,
do so.  If you must proceed upon your journey, I wish you well through
it, and will walk a little way with you before school begins.’

‘What are we to do, Nell?’ said the old man irresolutely, ‘say what
we’re to do, dear.’

It required no great persuasion to induce the child to answer that they
had better accept the invitation and remain.  She was happy to show her
gratitude to the kind schoolmaster by busying herself in the
performance of such household duties as his little cottage stood in
need of.  When these were done, she took some needle-work from her
basket, and sat herself down upon a stool beside the lattice, where the
honeysuckle and woodbine entwined their tender stems, and stealing into
the room filled it with their delicious breath.  Her grandfather was
basking in the sun outside, breathing the perfume of the flowers, and
idly watching the clouds as they floated on before the light summer
wind.

As the schoolmaster, after arranging the two forms in due order, took
his seat behind his desk and made other preparations for school, the
child was apprehensive that she might be in the way, and offered to
withdraw to her little bedroom.  But this he would not allow, and as he
seemed pleased to have her there, she remained, busying herself with
her work.

‘Have you many scholars, sir?’ she asked.

The poor schoolmaster shook his head, and said that they barely filled
the two forms.

‘Are the others clever, sir?’ asked the child, glancing at the trophies
on the wall.

‘Good boys,’ returned the schoolmaster, ‘good boys enough, my dear, but
they’ll never do like that.’

A small white-headed boy with a sunburnt face appeared at the door
while he was speaking, and stopping there to make a rustic bow, came in
and took his seat upon one of the forms.  The white-headed boy then put
an open book, astonishingly dog’s-eared upon his knees, and thrusting
his hands into his pockets began counting the marbles with which they
were filled; displaying in the expression of his face a remarkable
capacity of totally abstracting his mind from the spelling on which his
eyes were fixed.  Soon afterwards another white-headed little boy came
straggling in, and after him a red-headed lad, and after him two more
with white heads, and then one with a flaxen poll, and so on until the
forms were occupied by a dozen boys or thereabouts, with heads of every
colour but grey, and ranging in their ages from four years old to
fourteen years or more; for the legs of the youngest were a long way
from the floor when he sat upon the form, and the eldest was a heavy
good-tempered foolish fellow, about half a head taller than the
schoolmaster.

At the top of the first form--the post of honour in the school--was the
vacant place of the little sick scholar, and at the head of the row of
pegs on which those who came in hats or caps were wont to hang them up,
one was left empty.  No boy attempted to violate the sanctity of seat
or peg, but many a one looked from the empty spaces to the
schoolmaster, and whispered his idle neighbour behind his hand.

Then began the hum of conning over lessons and getting them by heart,
the whispered jest and stealthy game, and all the noise and drawl of
school; and in the midst of the din sat the poor schoolmaster, the very
image of meekness and simplicity, vainly attempting to fix his mind
upon the duties of the day, and to forget his little friend.  But the
tedium of his office reminded him more strongly of the willing scholar,
and his thoughts were rambling from his pupils--it was plain.

None knew this better than the idlest boys, who, growing bolder with
impunity, waxed louder and more daring; playing odd-or-even under the
master’s eye, eating apples openly and without rebuke, pinching each
other in sport or malice without the least reserve, and cutting their
autographs in the very legs of his desk.  The puzzled dunce, who stood
beside it to say his lesson out of book, looked no longer at the
ceiling for forgotten words, but drew closer to the master’s elbow and
boldly cast his eye upon the page; the wag of the little troop squinted
and made grimaces (at the smallest boy of course), holding no book
before his face, and his approving audience knew no constraint in their
delight.  If the master did chance to rouse himself and seem alive to
what was going on, the noise subsided for a moment and no eyes met his
but wore a studious and a deeply humble look; but the instant he
relapsed again, it broke out afresh, and ten times louder than before.

Oh! how some of those idle fellows longed to be outside, and how they
looked at the open door and window, as if they half meditated rushing
violently out, plunging into the woods, and being wild boys and savages
from that time forth.  What rebellious thoughts of the cool river, and
some shady bathing-place beneath willow trees with branches dipping in
the water, kept tempting and urging that sturdy boy, who, with his
shirt-collar unbuttoned and flung back as far as it could go, sat
fanning his flushed face with a spelling-book, wishing himself a whale,
or a tittlebat, or a fly, or anything but a boy at school on that hot,
broiling day!  Heat!  ask that other boy, whose seat being nearest to
the door gave him opportunities of gliding out into the garden and
driving his companions to madness by dipping his face into the bucket
of the well and then rolling on the grass--ask him if there were ever
such a day as that, when even the bees were diving deep down into the
cups of flowers and stopping there, as if they had made up their minds
to retire from business and be manufacturers of honey no more.  The day
was made for laziness, and lying on one’s back in green places, and
staring at the sky till its brightness forced one to shut one’s eyes
and go to sleep; and was this a time to be poring over musty books in a
dark room, slighted by the very sun itself?  Monstrous!

Nell sat by the window occupied with her work, but attentive still to
all that passed, though sometimes rather timid of the boisterous boys.
The lessons over, writing time began; and there being but one desk and
that the master’s, each boy sat at it in turn and laboured at his
crooked copy, while the master walked about.  This was a quieter time;
for he would come and look over the writer’s shoulder, and tell him
mildly to observe how such a letter was turned in such a copy on the
wall, praise such an up-stroke here and such a down-stroke there, and
bid him take it for his model.  Then he would stop and tell them what
the sick child had said last night, and how he had longed to be among
them once again; and such was the poor schoolmaster’s gentle and
affectionate manner, that the boys seemed quite remorseful that they
had worried him so much, and were absolutely quiet; eating no apples,
cutting no names, inflicting no pinches, and making no grimaces, for
full two minutes afterwards.

‘I think, boys,’ said the schoolmaster when the clock struck twelve,
‘that I shall give an extra half-holiday this afternoon.’

At this intelligence, the boys, led on and headed by the tall boy,
raised a great shout, in the midst of which the master was seen to
speak, but could not be heard.  As he held up his hand, however, in
token of his wish that they should be silent, they were considerate
enough to leave off, as soon as the longest-winded among them were
quite out of breath.

‘You must promise me first,’ said the schoolmaster, ‘that you’ll not be
noisy, or at least, if you are, that you’ll go away and be so--away out
of the village I mean.  I’m sure you wouldn’t disturb your old playmate
and companion.’

There was a general murmur (and perhaps a very sincere one, for they
were but boys) in the negative; and the tall boy, perhaps as sincerely
as any of them, called those about him to witness that he had only
shouted in a whisper.

‘Then pray don’t forget, there’s my dear scholars,’ said the
schoolmaster, ‘what I have asked you, and do it as a favour to me.  Be
as happy as you can, and don’t be unmindful that you are blessed with
health.  Good-bye all!’

‘Thank’ee, Sir,’ and ‘good-bye, Sir,’ were said a good many times in a
variety of voices, and the boys went out very slowly and softly.  But
there was the sun shining and there were the birds singing, as the sun
only shines and the birds only sing on holidays and half-holidays;
there were the trees waving to all free boys to climb and nestle among
their leafy branches; the hay, entreating them to come and scatter it
to the pure air; the green corn, gently beckoning towards wood and
stream; the smooth ground, rendered smoother still by blending lights
and shadows, inviting to runs and leaps, and long walks God knows
whither.  It was more than boy could bear, and with a joyous whoop the
whole cluster took to their heels and spread themselves about, shouting
and laughing as they went.

‘It’s natural, thank Heaven!’ said the poor schoolmaster, looking after
them.  ‘I’m very glad they didn’t mind me!’

It is difficult, however, to please everybody, as most of us would have
discovered, even without the fable which bears that moral, and in the
course of the afternoon several mothers and aunts of pupils looked in
to express their entire disapproval of the schoolmaster’s proceeding.
A few confined themselves to hints, such as politely inquiring what
red-letter day or saint’s day the almanack said it was; a few (these
were the profound village politicians) argued that it was a slight to
the throne and an affront to church and state, and savoured of
revolutionary principles, to grant a half-holiday upon any lighter
occasion than the birthday of the Monarch; but the majority expressed
their displeasure on private grounds and in plain terms, arguing that
to put the pupils on this short allowance of learning was nothing but
an act of downright robbery and fraud: and one old lady, finding that
she could not inflame or irritate the peaceable schoolmaster by talking
to him, bounced out of his house and talked at him for half-an-hour
outside his own window, to another old lady, saying that of course he
would deduct this half-holiday from his weekly charge, or of course he
would naturally expect to have an opposition started against him; there
was no want of idle chaps in that neighbourhood (here the old lady
raised her voice), and some chaps who were too idle even to be
schoolmasters, might soon find that there were other chaps put over
their heads, and so she would have them take care, and look pretty
sharp about them.  But all these taunts and vexations failed to elicit
one word from the meek schoolmaster, who sat with the child by his
side--a little more dejected perhaps, but quite silent and
uncomplaining.

Towards night an old woman came tottering up the garden as speedily as
she could, and meeting the schoolmaster at the door, said he was to go
to Dame West’s directly, and had best run on before her.  He and the
child were on the point of going out together for a walk, and without
relinquishing her hand, the schoolmaster hurried away, leaving the
messenger to follow as she might.

They stopped at a cottage-door, and the schoolmaster knocked softly at
it with his hand.  It was opened without loss of time.  They entered a
room where a little group of women were gathered about one, older than
the rest, who was crying very bitterly, and sat wringing her hands and
rocking herself to and fro.

‘Oh, dame!’ said the schoolmaster, drawing near her chair, ‘is it so
bad as this?’

‘He’s going fast,’ cried the old woman; ‘my grandson’s dying.  It’s all
along of you.  You shouldn’t see him now, but for his being so earnest
on it.  This is what his learning has brought him to.  Oh dear, dear,
dear, what can I do!’

‘Do not say that I am in any fault,’ urged the gentle school-master.
‘I am not hurt, dame.  No, no.  You are in great distress of mind, and
don’t mean what you say.  I am sure you don’t.’

‘I do,’ returned the old woman.  ‘I mean it all.  If he hadn’t been
poring over his books out of fear of you, he would have been well and
merry now, I know he would.’

The schoolmaster looked round upon the other women as if to entreat
some one among them to say a kind word for him, but they shook their
heads, and murmured to each other that they never thought there was
much good in learning, and that this convinced them.  Without saying a
word in reply, or giving them a look of reproach, he followed the old
woman who had summoned him (and who had now rejoined them) into another
room, where his infant friend, half-dressed, lay stretched upon a bed.

He was a very young boy; quite a little child.  His hair still hung in
curls about his face, and his eyes were very bright; but their light
was of Heaven, not earth.  The schoolmaster took a seat beside him, and
stooping over the pillow, whispered his name.  The boy sprung up,
stroked his face with his hand, and threw his wasted arms round his
neck, crying out that he was his dear kind friend.

‘I hope I always was.  I meant to be, God knows,’ said the poor
schoolmaster.

‘Who is that?’ said the boy, seeing Nell.  ‘I am afraid to kiss her,
lest I should make her ill.  Ask her to shake hands with me.’

The sobbing child came closer up, and took the little languid hand in
hers. Releasing his again after a time, the sick boy laid him gently
down.

‘You remember the garden, Harry,’ whispered the schoolmaster, anxious
to rouse him, for a dulness seemed gathering upon the child, ‘and how
pleasant it used to be in the evening time?  You must make haste to
visit it again, for I think the very flowers have missed you, and are
less gay than they used to be.  You will come soon, my dear, very soon
now--won’t you?’

The boy smiled faintly--so very, very faintly--and put his hand upon
his friend’s grey head.  He moved his lips too, but no voice came from
them; no, not a sound.

In the silence that ensued, the hum of distant voices borne upon the
evening air came floating through the open window.  ‘What’s that?’ said
the sick child, opening his eyes.

‘The boys at play upon the green.’

He took a handkerchief from his pillow, and tried to wave it above his
head.  But the feeble arm dropped powerless down.

‘Shall I do it?’ said the schoolmaster.

‘Please wave it at the window,’ was the faint reply.  ‘Tie it to the
lattice.  Some of them may see it there.  Perhaps they’ll think of me,
and look this way.’

He raised his head, and glanced from the fluttering signal to his idle
bat, that lay with slate and book and other boyish property upon a
table in the room.  And then he laid him softly down once more, and
asked if the little girl were there, for he could not see her.

She stepped forward, and pressed the passive hand that lay upon the
coverlet.  The two old friends and companions--for such they were,
though they were man and child--held each other in a long embrace, and
then the little scholar turned his face towards the wall, and fell
asleep.

The poor schoolmaster sat in the same place, holding the small cold
hand in his, and chafing it.  It was but the hand of a dead child.  He
felt that; and yet he chafed it still, and could not lay it down.




CHAPTER 26

Almost broken-hearted, Nell withdrew with the schoolmaster from the
bedside and returned to his cottage.  In the midst of her grief and
tears she was yet careful to conceal their real cause from the old man,
for the dead boy had been a grandchild, and left but one aged relative
to mourn his premature decay.

She stole away to bed as quickly as she could, and when she was alone,
gave free vent to the sorrow with which her breast was overcharged.
But the sad scene she had witnessed, was not without its lesson of
content and gratitude; of content with the lot which left her health
and freedom; and gratitude that she was spared to the one relative and
friend she loved, and to live and move in a beautiful world, when so
many young creatures--as young and full of hope as she--were stricken
down and gathered to their graves.  How many of the mounds in that old
churchyard where she had lately strayed, grew green above the graves of
children!  And though she thought as a child herself, and did not
perhaps sufficiently consider to what a bright and happy existence
those who die young are borne, and how in death they lose the pain of
seeing others die around them, bearing to the tomb some strong
affection of their hearts (which makes the old die many times in one
long life), still she thought wisely enough, to draw a plain and easy
moral from what she had seen that night, and to store it, deep in her
mind.

Her dreams were of the little scholar: not coffined and covered up, but
mingling with angels, and smiling happily.  The sun darting his
cheerful rays into the room, awoke her; and now there remained but to
take leave of the poor schoolmaster and wander forth once more.

By the time they were ready to depart, school had begun.  In the
darkened room, the din of yesterday was going on again: a little
sobered and softened down, perhaps, but only a very little, if at all.
The schoolmaster rose from his desk and walked with them to the gate.

It was with a trembling and reluctant hand, that the child held out to
him the money which the lady had given her at the races for her
flowers: faltering in her thanks as she thought how small the sum was,
and blushing as she offered it.  But he bade her put it up, and
stooping to kiss her cheek, turned back into his house.

They had not gone half-a-dozen paces when he was at the door again; the
old man retraced his steps to shake hands, and the child did the same.

‘Good fortune and happiness go with you!’ said the poor schoolmaster.
‘I am quite a solitary man now.  If you ever pass this way again,
you’ll not forget the little village-school.’

‘We shall never forget it, sir,’ rejoined Nell; ‘nor ever forget to be
grateful to you for your kindness to us.’

‘I have heard such words from the lips of children very often,’ said
the schoolmaster, shaking his head, and smiling thoughtfully, ‘but they
were soon forgotten.  I had attached one young friend to me, the better
friend for being young--but that’s over--God bless you!’

They bade him farewell very many times, and turned away, walking slowly
and often looking back, until they could see him no more.  At length
they had left the village far behind, and even lost sight of the smoke
among the trees.  They trudged onward now, at a quicker pace, resolving
to keep the main road, and go wherever it might lead them.

But main roads stretch a long, long way.  With the exception of two or
three inconsiderable clusters of cottages which they passed, without
stopping, and one lonely road-side public-house where they had some
bread and cheese, this highway had led them to nothing--late in the
afternoon--and still lengthened out, far in the distance, the same
dull, tedious, winding course, that they had been pursuing all day.  As
they had no resource, however, but to go forward, they still kept on,
though at a much slower pace, being very weary and fatigued.

The afternoon had worn away into a beautiful evening, when they arrived
at a point where the road made a sharp turn and struck across a common.
On the border of this common, and close to the hedge which divided it
from the cultivated fields, a caravan was drawn up to rest; upon which,
by reason of its situation, they came so suddenly that they could not
have avoided it if they would.

It was not a shabby, dingy, dusty cart, but a smart little house upon
wheels, with white dimity curtains festooning the windows, and
window-shutters of green picked out with panels of a staring red, in
which happily-contrasted colours the whole concern shone brilliant.
Neither was it a poor caravan drawn by a single donkey or emaciated
horse, for a pair of horses in pretty good condition were released from
the shafts and grazing on the frouzy grass.  Neither was it a gipsy
caravan, for at the open door (graced with a bright brass knocker) sat
a Christian lady, stout and comfortable to look upon, who wore a large
bonnet trembling with bows.  And that it was not an unprovided or
destitute caravan was clear from this lady’s occupation, which was the
very pleasant and refreshing one of taking tea.  The tea-things,
including a bottle of rather suspicious character and a cold knuckle of
ham, were set forth upon a drum, covered with a white napkin; and
there, as if at the most convenient round-table in all the world, sat
this roving lady, taking her tea and enjoying the prospect.

It happened that at that moment the lady of the caravan had her cup
(which, that everything about her might be of a stout and comfortable
kind, was a breakfast cup) to her lips, and that having her eyes lifted
to the sky in her enjoyment of the full flavour of the tea, not
unmingled possibly with just the slightest dash or gleam of something
out of the suspicious bottle--but this is mere speculation and not
distinct matter of history--it happened that being thus agreeably
engaged, she did not see the travellers when they first came up.  It
was not until she was in the act of getting down the cup, and drawing a
long breath after the exertion of causing its contents to disappear,
that the lady of the caravan beheld an old man and a young child
walking slowly by, and glancing at her proceedings with eyes of modest
but hungry admiration.

‘Hey!’ cried the lady of the caravan, scooping the crumbs out of her
lap and swallowing the same before wiping her lips.  ‘Yes, to be
sure--Who won the Helter-Skelter Plate, child?’

‘Won what, ma’am?’ asked Nell.

‘The Helter-Skelter Plate at the races, child--the plate that was run
for on the second day.’

‘On the second day, ma’am?’

‘Second day!  Yes, second day,’ repeated the lady with an air of
impatience.  ‘Can’t you say who won the Helter-Skelter Plate when
you’re asked the question civilly?’

‘I don’t know, ma’am.’

‘Don’t know!’ repeated the lady of the caravan; ‘why, you were there.
I saw you with my own eyes.’

Nell was not a little alarmed to hear this, supposing that the lady
might be intimately acquainted with the firm of Short and Codlin; but
what followed tended to reassure her.

‘And very sorry I was,’ said the lady of the caravan, ‘to see you in
company with a Punch; a low, practical, wulgar wretch, that people
should scorn to look at.’

‘I was not there by choice,’ returned the child; ‘we didn’t know our
way, and the two men were very kind to us, and let us travel with them.
Do you--do you know them, ma’am?’

‘Know ‘em, child!’ cried the lady of the caravan in a sort of shriek.
‘Know them!  But you’re young and inexperienced, and that’s your excuse
for asking sich a question.  Do I look as if I know’d ‘em, does the
caravan look as if it know’d ‘em?’

‘No, ma’am, no,’ said the child, fearing she had committed some
grievous fault.  ‘I beg your pardon.’

It was granted immediately, though the lady still appeared much ruffled
and discomposed by the degrading supposition.  The child then explained
that they had left the races on the first day, and were travelling to
the next town on that road, where they purposed to spend the night.  As
the countenance of the stout lady began to clear up, she ventured to
inquire how far it was.  The reply--which the stout lady did not come
to, until she had thoroughly explained that she went to the races on
the first day in a gig, and as an expedition of pleasure, and that her
presence there had no connexion with any matters of business or
profit--was, that the town was eight miles off.

This discouraging information a little dashed the child, who could
scarcely repress a tear as she glanced along the darkening road.  Her
grandfather made no complaint, but he sighed heavily as he leaned upon
his staff, and vainly tried to pierce the dusty distance.

The lady of the caravan was in the act of gathering her tea equipage
together preparatory to clearing the table, but noting the child’s
anxious manner she hesitated and stopped.  The child curtseyed, thanked
her for her information, and giving her hand to the old man had already
got some fifty yards or so away, when the lady of the caravan called to
her to return.

‘Come nearer, nearer still,’ said she, beckoning to her to ascend the
steps.  ‘Are you hungry, child?’

‘Not very, but we are tired, and it’s--it IS a long way.’

‘Well, hungry or not, you had better have some tea,’ rejoined her new
acquaintance.  ‘I suppose you are agreeable to that, old gentleman?’

The grandfather humbly pulled off his hat and thanked her.  The lady of
the caravan then bade him come up the steps likewise, but the drum
proving an inconvenient table for two, they descended again, and sat
upon the grass, where she handed down to them the tea-tray, the bread
and butter, the knuckle of ham, and in short everything of which she
had partaken herself, except the bottle which she had already embraced
an opportunity of slipping into her pocket.

‘Set ‘em out near the hind wheels, child, that’s the best place,’ said
their friend, superintending the arrangements from above.  ‘Now hand up
the teapot for a little more hot water, and a pinch of fresh tea, and
then both of you eat and drink as much as you can, and don’t spare
anything; that’s all I ask of you.’

They might perhaps have carried out the lady’s wish, if it had been
less freely expressed, or even if it had not been expressed at all.
But as this direction relieved them from any shadow of delicacy or
uneasiness, they made a hearty meal and enjoyed it to the utmost.

While they were thus engaged, the lady of the caravan alighted on the
earth, and with her hands clasped behind her, and her large bonnet
trembling excessively, walked up and down in a measured tread and very
stately manner, surveying the caravan from time to time with an air of
calm delight, and deriving particular gratification from the red panels
and the brass knocker.  When she had taken this gentle exercise for
some time, she sat down upon the steps and called ‘George’; whereupon a
man in a carter’s frock, who had been so shrouded in a hedge up to this
time as to see everything that passed without being seen himself,
parted the twigs that concealed him, and appeared in a sitting
attitude, supporting on his legs a baking-dish and a half-gallon stone
bottle, and bearing in his right hand a knife, and in his left a fork.

‘Yes, Missus,’ said George.

‘How did you find the cold pie, George?’

‘It warn’t amiss, mum.’

‘And the beer,’ said the lady of the caravan, with an appearance of
being more interested in this question than the last; ‘is it passable,
George?’

‘It’s more flatterer than it might be,’ George returned, ‘but it an’t
so bad for all that.’

To set the mind of his mistress at rest, he took a sip (amounting in
quantity to a pint or thereabouts) from the stone bottle, and then
smacked his lips, winked his eye, and nodded his head.  No doubt with
the same amiable desire, he immediately resumed his knife and fork, as
a practical assurance that the beer had wrought no bad effect upon his
appetite.

The lady of the caravan looked on approvingly for some time, and then
said,

‘Have you nearly finished?’

‘Wery nigh, mum.’  And indeed, after scraping the dish all round with
his knife and carrying the choice brown morsels to his mouth, and after
taking such a scientific pull at the stone bottle that, by degrees
almost imperceptible to the sight, his head went further and further
back until he lay nearly at his full length upon the ground, this
gentleman declared himself quite disengaged, and came forth from his
retreat.

‘I hope I haven’t hurried you, George,’ said his mistress, who appeared
to have a great sympathy with his late pursuit.

‘If you have,’ returned the follower, wisely reserving himself for any
favourable contingency that might occur, ‘we must make up for it next
time, that’s all.’

‘We are not a heavy load, George?’

‘That’s always what the ladies say,’ replied the man, looking a long
way round, as if he were appealing to Nature in general against such
monstrous propositions.  ‘If you see a woman a driving, you’ll always
perceive that she never will keep her whip still; the horse can’t go
fast enough for her.  If cattle have got their proper load, you never
can persuade a woman that they’ll not bear something more.  What is the
cause of this here?’

‘Would these two travellers make much difference to the horses, if we
took them with us?’ asked his mistress, offering no reply to the
philosophical inquiry, and pointing to Nell and the old man, who were
painfully preparing to resume their journey on foot.

‘They’d make a difference in course,’ said George doggedly.

‘Would they make much difference?’ repeated his mistress.  ‘They can’t
be very heavy.’

‘The weight o’ the pair, mum,’ said George, eyeing them with the look
of a man who was calculating within half an ounce or so, ‘would be a
trifle under that of Oliver Cromwell.’

Nell was very much surprised that the man should be so accurately
acquainted with the weight of one whom she had read of in books as
having lived considerably before their time, but speedily forgot the
subject in the joy of hearing that they were to go forward in the
caravan, for which she thanked its lady with unaffected earnestness.
She helped with great readiness and alacrity to put away the tea-things
and other matters that were lying about, and, the horses being by that
time harnessed, mounted into the vehicle, followed by her delighted
grandfather.  Their patroness then shut the door and sat herself down
by her drum at an open window; and, the steps being struck by George
and stowed under the carriage, away they went, with a great noise of
flapping and creaking and straining, and the bright brass knocker,
which nobody ever knocked at, knocking one perpetual double knock of
its own accord as they jolted heavily along.




CHAPTER 27

When they had travelled slowly forward for some short distance, Nell
ventured to steal a look round the caravan and observe it more closely.
One half of it--that moiety in which the comfortable proprietress was
then seated--was carpeted, and so partitioned off at the further end as
to accommodate a sleeping-place, constructed after the fashion of a
berth on board ship, which was shaded, like the little windows, with
fair white curtains, and looked comfortable enough, though by what kind
of gymnastic exercise the lady of the caravan ever contrived to get
into it, was an unfathomable mystery.  The other half served for a
kitchen, and was fitted up with a stove whose small chimney passed
through the roof.  It held also a closet or larder, several chests, a
great pitcher of water, and a few cooking-utensils and articles of
crockery.  These latter necessaries hung upon the walls, which, in that
portion of the establishment devoted to the lady of the caravan, were
ornamented with such gayer and lighter decorations as a triangle and a
couple of well-thumbed tambourines.

The lady of the caravan sat at one window in all the pride and poetry
of the musical instruments, and little Nell and her grandfather sat at
the other in all the humility of the kettle and saucepans, while the
machine jogged on and shifted the darkening prospect very slowly.  At
first the two travellers spoke little, and only in whispers, but as
they grew more familiar with the place they ventured to converse with
greater freedom, and talked about the country through which they were
passing, and the different objects that presented themselves, until the
old man fell asleep; which the lady of the caravan observing, invited
Nell to come and sit beside her.

‘Well, child,’ she said, ‘how do you like this way of travelling?’

Nell replied that she thought it was very pleasant indeed, to which the
lady assented in the case of people who had their spirits.  For
herself, she said, she was troubled with a lowness in that respect
which required a constant stimulant; though whether the aforesaid
stimulant was derived from the suspicious bottle of which mention has
been already made or from other sources, she did not say.

‘That’s the happiness of you young people,’ she continued.  ‘You don’t
know what it is to be low in your feelings.  You always have your
appetites too, and what a comfort that is.’

Nell thought that she could sometimes dispense with her own appetite
very conveniently; and thought, moreover, that there was nothing either
in the lady’s personal appearance or in her manner of taking tea, to
lead to the conclusion that her natural relish for meat and drink had
at all failed her.  She silently assented, however, as in duty bound,
to what the lady had said, and waited until she should speak again.

Instead of speaking, however, she sat looking at the child for a long
time in silence, and then getting up, brought out from a corner a large
roll of canvas about a yard in width, which she laid upon the floor and
spread open with her foot until it nearly reached from one end of the
caravan to the other.

‘There, child,’ she said, ‘read that.’

Nell walked down it, and read aloud, in enormous black letters, the
inscription, ‘JARLEY’S WAX-WORK.’

‘Read it again,’ said the lady, complacently.

‘Jarley’s Wax-Work,’ repeated Nell.

‘That’s me,’ said the lady.  ‘I am Mrs Jarley.’

Giving the child an encouraging look, intended to reassure her and let
her know, that, although she stood in the presence of the original
Jarley, she must not allow herself to be utterly overwhelmed and borne
down, the lady of the caravan unfolded another scroll, whereon was the
inscription, ‘One hundred figures the full size of life,’ and then
another scroll, on which was written, ‘The only stupendous collection
of real wax-work in the world,’ and then several smaller scrolls with
such inscriptions as ‘Now exhibiting within’--‘The genuine and only
Jarley’--‘Jarley’s unrivalled collection’--‘Jarley is the delight of
the Nobility and Gentry’--‘The Royal Family are the patrons of Jarley.’
When she had exhibited these leviathans of public announcement to the
astonished child, she brought forth specimens of the lesser fry in the
shape of hand-bills, some of which were couched in the form of parodies
on popular melodies, as ‘Believe me if all Jarley’s wax-work so
rare’--‘I saw thy show in youthful prime’--‘Over the water to Jarley;’
while, to consult all tastes, others were composed with a view to the
lighter and more facetious spirits, as a parody on the favourite air of
‘If I had a donkey,’ beginning,

  If I know’d a donkey wot wouldn’t go
  To see Mrs JARLEY’S wax-work show,
  Do you think I’d acknowledge him?  Oh no no!
  Then run to Jarley’s--

--besides several compositions in prose, purporting to be dialogues
between the Emperor of China and an oyster, or the Archbishop of
Canterbury and a dissenter on the subject of church-rates, but all
having the same moral, namely, that the reader must make haste to
Jarley’s, and that children and servants were admitted at half-price.
When she had brought all these testimonials of her important position
in society to bear upon her young companion, Mrs Jarley rolled them up,
and having put them carefully away, sat down again, and looked at the
child in triumph.

‘Never go into the company of a filthy Punch any more,’ said Mrs
Jarley, ‘after this.’

‘I never saw any wax-work, ma’am,’ said Nell.  ‘Is it funnier than
Punch?’

‘Funnier!’ said Mrs Jarley in a shrill voice.  ‘It is not funny at all.’

‘Oh!’ said Nell, with all possible humility.

‘It isn’t funny at all,’ repeated Mrs Jarley.  ‘It’s calm and--what’s
that word again--critical?--no--classical, that’s it--it’s calm and
classical.  No low beatings and knockings about, no jokings and
squeakings like your precious Punches, but always the same, with a
constantly unchanging air of coldness and gentility; and so like life,
that if wax-work only spoke and walked about, you’d hardly know the
difference.  I won’t go so far as to say, that, as it is, I’ve seen
wax-work quite like life, but I’ve certainly seen some life that was
exactly like wax-work.’

‘Is it here, ma’am?’ asked Nell, whose curiosity was awakened by this
description.

‘Is what here, child?’

‘The wax-work, ma’am.’

‘Why, bless you, child, what are you thinking of?  How could such a
collection be here, where you see everything except the inside of one
little cupboard and a few boxes?  It’s gone on in the other wans to the
assembly-rooms, and there it’ll be exhibited the day after to-morrow.
You are going to the same town, and you’ll see it I dare say.  It’s
natural to expect that you’ll see it, and I’ve no doubt you will.  I
suppose you couldn’t stop away if you was to try ever so much.’

‘I shall not be in the town, I think, ma’am,’ said the child.

‘Not there!’ cried Mrs Jarley.  ‘Then where will you be?’

‘I--I--don’t quite know.  I am not certain.’

‘You don’t mean to say that you’re travelling about the country without
knowing where you’re going to?’ said the lady of the caravan.  ‘What
curious people you are!  What line are you in?  You looked to me at the
races, child, as if you were quite out of your element, and had got
there by accident.’

‘We were there quite by accident,’ returned Nell, confused by this
abrupt questioning.  ‘We are poor people, ma’am, and are only wandering
about.  We have nothing to do;--I wish we had.’

‘You amaze me more and more,’ said Mrs Jarley, after remaining for some
time as mute as one of her own figures.  ‘Why, what do you call
yourselves?  Not beggars?’

‘Indeed, ma’am, I don’t know what else we are,’ returned the child.

‘Lord bless me,’ said the lady of the caravan.  ‘I never heard of such
a thing.  Who’d have thought it!’

She remained so long silent after this exclamation, that Nell feared
she felt her having been induced to bestow her protection and
conversation upon one so poor, to be an outrage upon her dignity that
nothing could repair.  This persuasion was rather confirmed than
otherwise by the tone in which she at length broke silence and said,

‘And yet you can read.  And write too, I shouldn’t wonder?’

‘Yes, ma’am,’ said the child, fearful of giving new offence by the
confession.

‘Well, and what a thing that is,’ returned Mrs Jarley.  ‘I can’t!’

Nell said ‘indeed’ in a tone which might imply, either that she was
reasonably surprised to find the genuine and only Jarley, who was the
delight of the Nobility and Gentry and the peculiar pet of the Royal
Family, destitute of these familiar arts; or that she presumed so great
a lady could scarcely stand in need of such ordinary accomplishments.
In whatever way Mrs Jarley received the response, it did not provoke
her to further questioning, or tempt her into any more remarks at the
time, for she relapsed into a thoughtful silence, and remained in that
state so long that Nell withdrew to the other window and rejoined her
grandfather, who was now awake.

At length the lady of the caravan shook off her fit of meditation, and,
summoning the driver to come under the window at which she was seated,
held a long conversation with him in a low tone of voice, as if she
were asking his advice on an important point, and discussing the pros
and cons of some very weighty matter.  This conference at length
concluded, she drew in her head again, and beckoned Nell to approach.

‘And the old gentleman too,’ said Mrs Jarley; ‘for I want to have a
word with him.  Do you want a good situation for your grand-daughter,
master?  If you do, I can put her in the way of getting one.  What do
you say?’

‘I can’t leave her,’ answered the old man.  ‘We can’t separate.  What
would become of me without her?’

‘I should have thought you were old enough to take care of yourself, if
you ever will be,’ retorted Mrs Jarley sharply.

‘But he never will be,’ said the child in an earnest whisper.  ‘I fear
he never will be again.  Pray do not speak harshly to him.  We are very
thankful to you,’ she added aloud; ‘but neither of us could part from
the other if all the wealth of the world were halved between us.’

Mrs Jarley was a little disconcerted by this reception of her proposal,
and looked at the old man, who tenderly took Nell’s hand and detained
it in his own, as if she could have very well dispensed with his
company or even his earthly existence.  After an awkward pause, she
thrust her head out of the window again, and had another conference
with the driver upon some point on which they did not seem to agree
quite so readily as on their former topic of discussion; but they
concluded at last, and she addressed the grandfather again.

‘If you’re really disposed to employ yourself,’ said Mrs Jarley, ‘there
would be plenty for you to do in the way of helping to dust the
figures, and take the checks, and so forth.  What I want your
grand-daughter for, is to point ‘em out to the company; they would be
soon learnt, and she has a way with her that people wouldn’t think
unpleasant, though she does come after me; for I’ve been always
accustomed to go round with visitors myself, which I should keep on
doing now, only that my spirits make a little ease absolutely
necessary.  It’s not a common offer, bear in mind,’ said the lady,
rising into the tone and manner in which she was accustomed to address
her audiences; ‘it’s Jarley’s wax-work, remember.  The duty’s very
light and genteel, the company particularly select, the exhibition
takes place in assembly-rooms, town-halls, large rooms at inns, or
auction galleries.  There is none of your open-air wagrancy at
Jarley’s, recollect; there is no tarpaulin and sawdust at Jarley’s,
remember.  Every expectation held out in the handbills is realised to
the utmost, and the whole forms an effect of imposing brilliancy
hitherto unrivalled in this kingdom.  Remember that the price of
admission is only sixpence, and that this is an opportunity which may
never occur again!’

Descending from the sublime when she had reached this point, to the
details of common life, Mrs Jarley remarked that with reference to
salary she could pledge herself to no specific sum until she had
sufficiently tested Nell’s abilities, and narrowly watched her in the
performance of her duties.  But board and lodging, both for her and her
grandfather, she bound herself to provide, and she furthermore passed
her word that the board should always be good in quality, and in
quantity plentiful.

Nell and her grandfather consulted together, and while they were so
engaged, Mrs Jarley with her hands behind her walked up and down the
caravan, as she had walked after tea on the dull earth, with uncommon
dignity and self-esteem.  Nor will this appear so slight a circumstance
as to be unworthy of mention, when it is remembered that the caravan
was in uneasy motion all the time, and that none but a person of great
natural stateliness and acquired grace could have forborne to stagger.

‘Now, child?’ cried Mrs Jarley, coming to a halt as Nell turned towards
her.

‘We are very much obliged to you, ma’am,’ said Nell, ‘and thankfully
accept your offer.’

‘And you’ll never be sorry for it,’ returned Mrs Jarley.  ‘I’m pretty
sure of that.  So as that’s all settled, let us have a bit of supper.’

In the meanwhile, the caravan blundered on as if it too had been
drinking strong beer and was drowsy, and came at last upon the paved
streets of a town which were clear of passengers, and quiet, for it was
by this time near midnight, and the townspeople were all abed.  As it
was too late an hour to repair to the exhibition room, they turned
aside into a piece of waste ground that lay just within the old
town-gate, and drew up there for the night, near to another caravan,
which, notwithstanding that it bore on the lawful panel the great name
of Jarley, and was employed besides in conveying from place to place
the wax-work which was its country’s pride, was designated by a
grovelling stamp-office as a ‘Common Stage Waggon,’ and numbered
too--seven thousand odd hundred--as though its precious freight were
mere flour or coals!

This ill-used machine being empty (for it had deposited its burden at
the place of exhibition, and lingered here until its services were
again required) was assigned to the old man as his sleeping-place for
the night; and within its wooden walls, Nell made him up the best bed
she could, from the materials at hand.  For herself, she was to sleep
in Mrs Jarley’s own travelling-carriage, as a signal mark of that
lady’s favour and confidence.

She had taken leave of her grandfather and was returning to the other
waggon, when she was tempted by the coolness of the night to linger for
a little while in the air.  The moon was shining down upon the old
gateway of the town, leaving the low archway very black and dark; and
with a mingled sensation of curiosity and fear, she slowly approached
the gate, and stood still to look up at it, wondering to see how dark,
and grim, and old, and cold, it looked.

There was an empty niche from which some old statue had fallen or been
carried away hundreds of years ago, and she was thinking what strange
people it must have looked down upon when it stood there, and how many
hard struggles might have taken place, and how many murders might have
been done, upon that silent spot, when there suddenly emerged from the
black shade of the arch, a man.  The instant he appeared, she
recognised him--Who could have failed to recognise, in that instant,
the ugly misshapen Quilp!

The street beyond was so narrow, and the shadow of the houses on one
side of the way so deep, that he seemed to have risen out of the earth.
But there he was.  The child withdrew into a dark corner, and saw him
pass close to her.  He had a stick in his hand, and, when he had got
clear of the shadow of the gateway, he leant upon it, looked
back--directly, as it seemed, towards where she stood--and beckoned.

To her?  oh no, thank God, not to her; for as she stood, in an
extremity of fear, hesitating whether to scream for help, or come from
her hiding-place and fly, before he should draw nearer, there issued
slowly forth from the arch another figure--that of a boy--who carried
on his back a trunk.

‘Faster, sirrah!’ cried Quilp, looking up at the old gateway, and
showing in the moonlight like some monstrous image that had come down
from its niche and was casting a backward glance at its old house,
‘faster!’

‘It’s a dreadful heavy load, Sir,’ the boy pleaded.  ‘I’ve come on very
fast, considering.’

‘_You_ have come fast, considering!’ retorted Quilp; ‘you creep, you dog,
you crawl, you measure distance like a worm.  There are the chimes now,
half-past twelve.’

He stopped to listen, and then turning upon the boy with a suddenness
and ferocity that made him start, asked at what hour that London coach
passed the corner of the road.  The boy replied, at one.

‘Come on then,’ said Quilp, ‘or I shall be too late.  Faster--do you
hear me?  Faster.’

The boy made all the speed he could, and Quilp led onward, constantly
turning back to threaten him, and urge him to greater haste.  Nell did
not dare to move until they were out of sight and hearing, and then
hurried to where she had left her grandfather, feeling as if the very
passing of the dwarf so near him must have filled him with alarm and
terror.  But he was sleeping soundly, and she softly withdrew.

As she was making her way to her own bed, she determined to say nothing
of this adventure, as upon whatever errand the dwarf had come (and she
feared it must have been in search of them) it was clear by his inquiry
about the London coach that he was on his way homeward, and as he had
passed through that place, it was but reasonable to suppose that they
were safer from his inquiries there, than they could be elsewhere.
These reflections did not remove her own alarm, for she had been too
much terrified to be easily composed, and felt as if she were hemmed in
by a legion of Quilps, and the very air itself were filled with them.

The delight of the Nobility and Gentry and the patronised of Royalty
had, by some process of self-abridgment known only to herself, got into
her travelling bed, where she was snoring peacefully, while the large
bonnet, carefully disposed upon the drum, was revealing its glories by
the light of a dim lamp that swung from the roof.  The child’s bed was
already made upon the floor, and it was a great comfort to her to hear
the steps removed as soon as she had entered, and to know that all easy
communication between persons outside and the brass knocker was by this
means effectually prevented.  Certain guttural sounds, too, which from
time to time ascended through the floor of the caravan, and a rustling
of straw in the same direction, apprised her that the driver was
couched upon the ground beneath, and gave her an additional feeling of
security.

Notwithstanding these protections, she could get none but broken sleep
by fits and starts all night, for fear of Quilp, who throughout her
uneasy dreams was somehow connected with the wax-work, or was wax-work
himself, or was Mrs Jarley and wax-work too, or was himself, Mrs
Jarley, wax-work, and a barrel organ all in one, and yet not exactly
any of them either.  At length, towards break of day, that deep sleep
came upon her which succeeds to weariness and over-watching, and which
has no consciousness but one of overpowering and irresistible enjoyment.




CHAPTER 28

Sleep hung upon the eyelids of the child so long, that, when she awoke,
Mrs Jarley was already decorated with her large bonnet, and actively
engaged in preparing breakfast.  She received Nell’s apology for being
so late with perfect good humour, and said that she should not have
roused her if she had slept on until noon.

‘Because it does you good,’ said the lady of the caravan, ‘when you’re
tired, to sleep as long as ever you can, and get the fatigue quite off;
and that’s another blessing of your time of life--you can sleep so very
sound.’

‘Have you had a bad night, ma’am?’ asked Nell.

‘I seldom have anything else, child,’ replied Mrs Jarley, with the air
of a martyr.  ‘I sometimes wonder how I bear it.’

Remembering the snores which had proceeded from that cleft in the
caravan in which the proprietress of the wax-work passed the night,
Nell rather thought she must have been dreaming of lying awake.
However, she expressed herself very sorry to hear such a dismal account
of her state of health, and shortly afterwards sat down with her
grandfather and Mrs Jarley to breakfast.  The meal finished, Nell
assisted to wash the cups and saucers, and put them in their proper
places, and these household duties performed, Mrs Jarley arrayed
herself in an exceedingly bright shawl for the purpose of making a
progress through the streets of the town.

‘The wan will come on to bring the boxes,’ said Mrs Jarley, and you had
better come in it, child.  I am obliged to walk, very much against my
will; but the people expect it of me, and public characters can’t be
their own masters and mistresses in such matters as these.  How do I
look, child?’

Nell returned a satisfactory reply, and Mrs Jarley, after sticking a
great many pins into various parts of her figure, and making several
abortive attempts to obtain a full view of her own back, was at last
satisfied with her appearance, and went forth majestically.

The caravan followed at no great distance.  As it went jolting through
the streets, Nell peeped from the window, curious to see in what kind
of place they were, and yet fearful of encountering at every turn the
dreaded face of Quilp.  It was a pretty large town, with an open square
which they were crawling slowly across, and in the middle of which was
the Town-Hall, with a clock-tower and a weather-cock.  There were
houses of stone, houses of red brick, houses of yellow brick, houses of
lath and plaster; and houses of wood, many of them very old, with
withered faces carved upon the beams, and staring down into the street.
These had very little winking windows, and low-arched doors, and, in
some of the narrower ways, quite overhung the pavement.  The streets
were very clean, very sunny, very empty, and very dull.  A few idle men
lounged about the two inns, and the empty market-place, and the
tradesmen’s doors, and some old people were dozing in chairs outside an
alms-house wall; but scarcely any passengers who seemed bent on going
anywhere, or to have any object in view, went by; and if perchance some
straggler did, his footsteps echoed on the hot bright pavement for
minutes afterwards.  Nothing seemed to be going on but the clocks, and
they had such drowzy faces, such heavy lazy hands, and such cracked
voices that they surely must have been too slow.  The very dogs were
all asleep, and the flies, drunk with moist sugar in the grocer’s shop,
forgot their wings and briskness, and baked to death in dusty corners
of the window.

Rumbling along with most unwonted noise, the caravan stopped at last at
the place of exhibition, where Nell dismounted amidst an admiring group
of children, who evidently supposed her to be an important item of the
curiosities, and were fully impressed with the belief that her
grandfather was a cunning device in wax.  The chests were taken out
with all convenient despatch, and taken in to be unlocked by Mrs
Jarley, who, attended by George and another man in velveteen shorts and
a drab hat ornamented with turnpike tickets, were waiting to dispose
their contents (consisting of red festoons and other ornamental devices
in upholstery work) to the best advantage in the decoration of the room.

They all got to work without loss of time, and very busy they were.  As
the stupendous collection were yet concealed by cloths, lest the
envious dust should injure their complexions, Nell bestirred herself to
assist in the embellishment of the room, in which her grandfather also
was of great service.  The two men being well used to it, did a great
deal in a short time; and Mrs Jarley served out the tin tacks from a
linen pocket like a toll-collector’s which she wore for the purpose,
and encouraged her assistants to renewed exertion.

While they were thus employed, a tallish gentleman with a hook nose and
black hair, dressed in a military surtout very short and tight in the
sleeves, and which had once been frogged and braided all over, but was
now sadly shorn of its garniture and quite threadbare--dressed too in
ancient grey pantaloons fitting tight to the leg, and a pair of pumps
in the winter of their existence--looked in at the door and smiled
affably.  Mrs Jarley’s back being then towards him, the military
gentleman shook his forefinger as a sign that her myrmidons were not to
apprise her of his presence, and stealing up close behind her, tapped
her on the neck, and cried playfully ‘Boh!’

‘What, Mr Slum!’ cried the lady of the wax-work.  ‘Lot! who’d have
thought of seeing you here!’

‘’Pon my soul and honour,’ said Mr Slum, ‘that’s a good remark.  ‘Pon
my soul and honour that’s a wise remark.  Who would have thought it!
George, my faithful feller, how are you?’

George received this advance with a surly indifference, observing that
he was well enough for the matter of that, and hammering lustily all
the time.

‘I came here,’ said the military gentleman turning to Mrs Jarley--‘’pon
my soul and honour I hardly know what I came here for.  It would
puzzle me to tell you, it would by Gad.  I wanted a little inspiration,
a little freshening up, a little change of ideas, and-- ‘Pon my soul
and honour,’ said the military gentleman, checking himself and looking
round the room, ‘what a devilish classical thing this is! by Gad, it’s
quite Minervian.’

‘It’ll look well enough when it comes to be finished,’ observed Mrs
Jarley.

‘Well enough!’ said Mr Slum.  ‘Will you believe me when I say it’s the
delight of my life to have dabbled in poetry, when I think I’ve
exercised my pen upon this charming theme?  By the way--any orders?  Is
there any little thing I can do for you?’

‘It comes so very expensive, sir,’ replied Mrs Jarley, ‘and I really
don’t think it does much good.’

‘Hush!  No, no!’ returned Mr Slum, elevating his hand.  ‘No fibs.  I’ll
not hear it.  Don’t say it don’t do good.  Don’t say it.  I know
better!’

‘I don’t think it does,’ said Mrs Jarley.

‘Ha, ha!’ cried Mr Slum, ‘you’re giving way, you’re coming down.  Ask
the perfumers, ask the blacking-makers, ask the hatters, ask the old
lottery-office-keepers--ask any man among ‘em what my poetry has done
for him, and mark my words, he blesses the name of Slum.  If he’s an
honest man, he raises his eyes to heaven, and blesses the name of
Slum--mark that!  You are acquainted with Westminster Abbey, Mrs
Jarley?’

‘Yes, surely.’

‘Then upon my soul and honour, ma’am, you’ll find in a certain angle of
that dreary pile, called Poets’ Corner, a few smaller names than Slum,’
retorted that gentleman, tapping himself expressively on the forehead
to imply that there was some slight quantity of brain behind it.  ‘I’ve
got a little trifle here, now,’ said Mr Slum, taking off his hat which
was full of scraps of paper, ‘a little trifle here, thrown off in the
heat of the moment, which I should say was exactly the thing you wanted
to set this place on fire with.  It’s an acrostic--the name at this
moment is Warren, and the idea’s a convertible one, and a positive
inspiration for Jarley.  Have the acrostic.’

‘I suppose it’s very dear,’ said Mrs Jarley.

‘Five shillings,’ returned Mr Slum, using his pencil as a toothpick.
‘Cheaper than any prose.’

‘I couldn’t give more than three,’ said Mrs Jarley.

‘--And six,’ retorted Slum.  ‘Come.  Three-and-six.’

Mrs Jarley was not proof against the poet’s insinuating manner, and Mr
Slum entered the order in a small note-book as a three-and-sixpenny
one.  Mr Slum then withdrew to alter the acrostic, after taking a most
affectionate leave of his patroness, and promising to return, as soon
as he possibly could, with a fair copy for the printer.

As his presence had not interfered with or interrupted the
preparations, they were now far advanced, and were completed shortly
after his departure.  When the festoons were all put up as tastily as
they might be, the stupendous collection was uncovered, and there were
displayed, on a raised platform some two feet from the floor, running
round the room and parted from the rude public by a crimson rope breast
high, divers sprightly effigies of celebrated characters, singly and in
groups, clad in glittering dresses of various climes and times, and
standing more or less unsteadily upon their legs, with their eyes very
wide open, and their nostrils very much inflated, and the muscles of
their legs and arms very strongly developed, and all their countenances
expressing great surprise.  All the gentlemen were very pigeon-breasted
and very blue about the beards; and all the ladies were miraculous
figures; and all the ladies and all the gentlemen were looking
intensely nowhere, and staring with extraordinary earnestness at
nothing.

When Nell had exhausted her first raptures at this glorious sight, Mrs
Jarley ordered the room to be cleared of all but herself and the child,
and, sitting herself down in an arm-chair in the centre, formally
invested Nell with a willow wand, long used by herself for pointing out
the characters, and was at great pains to instruct her in her duty.

‘That,’ said Mrs Jarley in her exhibition tone, as Nell touched a
figure at the beginning of the platform, ‘is an unfortunate Maid of
Honour in the Time of Queen Elizabeth, who died from pricking her
finger in consequence of working upon a Sunday.  Observe the blood
which is trickling from her finger; also the gold-eyed needle of the
period, with which she is at work.’

All this, Nell repeated twice or thrice: pointing to the finger and the
needle at the right times: and then passed on to the next.

‘That, ladies and gentlemen,’ said Mrs Jarley, ‘is Jasper Packlemerton
of atrocious memory, who courted and married fourteen wives, and
destroyed them all, by tickling the soles of their feet when they were
sleeping in the consciousness of innocence and virtue.  On being
brought to the scaffold and asked if he was sorry for what he had done,
he replied yes, he was sorry for having let ‘em off so easy, and hoped
all Christian husbands would pardon him the offence.  Let this be a
warning to all young ladies to be particular in the character of the
gentlemen of their choice.  Observe that his fingers are curled as if
in the act of tickling, and that his face is represented with a wink,
as he appeared when committing his barbarous murders.’

When Nell knew all about Mr Packlemerton, and could say it without
faltering, Mrs Jarley passed on to the fat man, and then to the thin
man, the tall man, the short man, the old lady who died of dancing at a
hundred and thirty-two, the wild boy of the woods, the woman who
poisoned fourteen families with pickled walnuts, and other historical
characters and interesting but misguided individuals.  And so well did
Nell profit by her instructions, and so apt was she to remember them,
that by the time they had been shut up together for a couple of hours,
she was in full possession of the history of the whole establishment,
and perfectly competent to the enlightenment of visitors.

Mrs Jarley was not slow to express her admiration at this happy result,
and carried her young friend and pupil to inspect the remaining
arrangements within doors, by virtue of which the passage had been
already converted into a grove of green-baize hung with the inscription
she had already seen (Mr Slum’s productions), and a highly ornamented
table placed at the upper end for Mrs Jarley herself, at which she was
to preside and take the money, in company with his Majesty King George
the Third, Mr Grimaldi as clown, Mary Queen of Scots, an anonymous
gentleman of the Quaker persuasion, and Mr Pitt holding in his hand a
correct model of the bill for the imposition of the window duty.  The
preparations without doors had not been neglected either; a nun of
great personal attractions was telling her beads on the little portico
over the door; and a brigand with the blackest possible head of hair,
and the clearest possible complexion, was at that moment going round
the town in a cart, consulting the miniature of a lady.

It now only remained that Mr Slum’s compositions should be judiciously
distributed; that the pathetic effusions should find their way to all
private houses and tradespeople; and that the parody commencing ‘If I
know’d a donkey,’ should be confined to the taverns, and circulated
only among the lawyers’ clerks and choice spirits of the place.  When
this had been done, and Mrs Jarley had waited upon the boarding-schools
in person, with a handbill composed expressly for them, in which it was
distinctly proved that wax-work refined the mind, cultivated the taste,
and enlarged the sphere of the human understanding, that indefatigable
lady sat down to dinner, and drank out of the suspicious bottle to a
flourishing campaign.




CHAPTER 29

Unquestionably Mrs Jarley had an inventive genius.  In the midst of the
various devices for attracting visitors to the exhibition, little Nell
was not forgotten.  The light cart in which the Brigand usually made
his perambulations being gaily dressed with flags and streamers, and
the Brigand placed therein, contemplating the miniature of his beloved
as usual, Nell was accommodated with a seat beside him, decorated with
artificial flowers, and in this state and ceremony rode slowly through
the town every morning, dispersing handbills from a basket, to the
sound of drum and trumpet.  The beauty of the child, coupled with her
gentle and timid bearing, produced quite a sensation in the little
country place.  The Brigand, heretofore a source of exclusive interest
in the streets, became a mere secondary consideration, and to be
important only as a part of the show of which she was the chief
attraction.  Grown-up folks began to be interested in the bright-eyed
girl, and some score of little boys fell desperately in love, and
constantly left enclosures of nuts and apples, directed in small-text,
at the wax-work door.

This desirable impression was not lost on Mrs Jarley, who, lest Nell
should become too cheap, soon sent the Brigand out alone again, and
kept her in the exhibition room, where she described the figures every
half-hour to the great satisfaction of admiring audiences.  And these
audiences were of a very superior description, including a great many
young ladies’ boarding-schools, whose favour Mrs Jarley had been at
great pains to conciliate, by altering the face and costume of Mr
Grimaldi as clown to represent Mr Lindley Murray as he appeared when
engaged in the composition of his English Grammar, and turning a
murderess of great renown into Mrs Hannah More--both of which
likenesses were admitted by Miss Monflathers, who was at the head of
the head Boarding and Day Establishment in the town, and who
condescended to take a Private View with eight chosen young ladies, to
be quite startling from their extreme correctness.  Mr Pitt in a
nightcap and bedgown, and without his boots, represented the poet
Cowper with perfect exactness; and Mary Queen of Scots in a dark wig,
white shirt-collar, and male attire, was such a complete image of Lord
Byron that the young ladies quite screamed when they saw it.  Miss
Monflathers, however, rebuked this enthusiasm, and took occasion to
reprove Mrs Jarley for not keeping her collection more select:
observing that His Lordship had held certain opinions quite
incompatible with wax-work honours, and adding something about a Dean
and Chapter, which Mrs Jarley did not understand.

Although her duties were sufficiently laborious, Nell found in the lady
of the caravan a very kind and considerate person, who had not only a
peculiar relish for being comfortable herself, but for making everybody
about her comfortable also; which latter taste, it may be remarked, is,
even in persons who live in much finer places than caravans, a far more
rare and uncommon one than the first, and is not by any means its
necessary consequence.  As her popularity procured her various little
fees from the visitors on which her patroness never demanded any toll,
and as her grandfather too was well-treated and useful, she had no
cause of anxiety in connexion with the wax-work, beyond that which
sprung from her recollection of Quilp, and her fears that he might
return and one day suddenly encounter them.

Quilp indeed was a perpetual night-mare to the child, who was
constantly haunted by a vision of his ugly face and stunted figure.
She slept, for their better security, in the room where the wax-work
figures were, and she never retired to this place at night but she
tortured herself--she could not help it--with imagining a resemblance,
in some one or other of their death-like faces, to the dwarf, and this
fancy would sometimes so gain upon her that she would almost believe he
had removed the figure and stood within the clothes.  Then there were
so many of them with their great glassy eyes--and, as they stood one
behind the other all about her bed, they looked so like living
creatures, and yet so unlike in their grim stillness and silence, that
she had a kind of terror of them for their own sakes, and would often
lie watching their dusky figures until she was obliged to rise and
light a candle, or go and sit at the open window and feel a
companionship in the bright stars.  At these times, she would recall
the old house and the window at which she used to sit alone; and then
she would think of poor Kit and all his kindness, until the tears came
into her eyes, and she would weep and smile together.

Often and anxiously at this silent hour, her thoughts reverted to her
grandfather, and she would wonder how much he remembered of their
former life, and whether he was ever really mindful of the change in
their condition and of their late helplessness and destitution.  When
they were wandering about, she seldom thought of this, but now she
could not help considering what would become of them if he fell sick,
or her own strength were to fail her.  He was very patient and willing,
happy to execute any little task, and glad to be of use; but he was in
the same listless state, with no prospect of improvement--a mere
child--a poor, thoughtless, vacant creature--a harmless fond old man,
susceptible of tender love and regard for her, and of pleasant and
painful impressions, but alive to nothing more.  It made her very sad
to know that this was so--so sad to see it that sometimes when he sat
idly by, smiling and nodding to her when she looked round, or when he
caressed some little child and carried it to and fro, as he was fond of
doing by the hour together, perplexed by its simple questions, yet
patient under his own infirmity, and seeming almost conscious of it
too, and humbled even before the mind of an infant--so sad it made her
to see him thus, that she would burst into tears, and, withdrawing into
some secret place, fall down upon her knees and pray that he might be
restored.

But, the bitterness of her grief was not in beholding him in this
condition, when he was at least content and tranquil, nor in her
solitary meditations on his altered state, though these were trials for
a young heart.  Cause for deeper and heavier sorrow was yet to come.

One evening, a holiday night with them, Nell and her grandfather went
out to walk.  They had been rather closely confined for some days, and
the weather being warm, they strolled a long distance.  Clear of the
town, they took a footpath which struck through some pleasant fields,
judging that it would terminate in the road they quitted and enable
them to return that way.  It made, however, a much wider circuit than
they had supposed, and thus they were tempted onward until sunset, when
they reached the track of which they were in search, and stopped to
rest.

It had been gradually getting overcast, and now the sky was dark and
lowering, save where the glory of the departing sun piled up masses of
gold and burning fire, decaying embers of which gleamed here and there
through the black veil, and shone redly down upon the earth.  The wind
began to moan in hollow murmurs, as the sun went down carrying glad day
elsewhere; and a train of dull clouds coming up against it, menaced
thunder and lightning.  Large drops of rain soon began to fall, and, as
the storm clouds came sailing onward, others supplied the void they
left behind and spread over all the sky.  Then was heard the low
rumbling of distant thunder, then the lightning quivered, and then the
darkness of an hour seemed to have gathered in an instant.

Fearful of taking shelter beneath a tree or hedge, the old man and the
child hurried along the high road, hoping to find some house in which
they could seek a refuge from the storm, which had now burst forth in
earnest, and every moment increased in violence.  Drenched with the
pelting rain, confused by the deafening thunder, and bewildered by the
glare of the forked lightning, they would have passed a solitary house
without being aware of its vicinity, had not a man, who was standing at
the door, called lustily to them to enter.

‘Your ears ought to be better than other folks’ at any rate, if you
make so little of the chance of being struck blind,’ he said,
retreating from the door and shading his eyes with his hands as the
jagged lightning came again.  ‘What were you going past for, eh?’ he
added, as he closed the door and led the way along a passage to a room
behind.

‘We didn’t see the house, sir, till we heard you calling,’ Nell replied.

‘No wonder,’ said the man, ‘with this lightning in one’s eyes,
by-the-by.  You had better stand by the fire here, and dry yourselves a
bit.  You can call for what you like if you want anything.  If you
don’t want anything, you are not obliged to give an order.  Don’t be
afraid of that.  This is a public-house, that’s all.  The Valiant
Soldier is pretty well known hereabouts.’

‘Is this house called the Valiant Soldier, Sir?’ asked Nell.

‘I thought everybody knew that,’ replied the landlord.  ‘Where have you
come from, if you don’t know the Valiant Soldier as well as the church
catechism?  This is the Valiant Soldier, by James Groves--Jem
Groves--honest Jem Groves, as is a man of unblemished moral character,
and has a good dry skittle-ground.  If any man has got anything to say
again Jem Groves, let him say it TO Jem Groves, and Jem Groves can
accommodate him with a customer on any terms from four pound a side to
forty.

With these words, the speaker tapped himself on the waistcoat to
intimate that he was the Jem Groves so highly eulogized; sparred
scientifically at a counterfeit Jem Groves, who was sparring at society
in general from a black frame over the chimney-piece; and, applying a
half-emptied glass of spirits and water to his lips, drank Jem Groves’s
health.

The night being warm, there was a large screen drawn across the room,
for a barrier against the heat of the fire.  It seemed as if somebody
on the other side of this screen had been insinuating doubts of Mr
Groves’s prowess, and had thereby given rise to these egotistical
expressions, for Mr Groves wound up his defiance by giving a loud knock
upon it with his knuckles and pausing for a reply from the other side.

‘There an’t many men,’ said Mr Groves, no answer being returned, ‘who
would ventur’ to cross Jem Groves under his own roof.  There’s only one
man, I know, that has nerve enough for that, and that man’s not a
hundred mile from here neither.  But he’s worth a dozen men, and I let
him say of me whatever he likes in consequence--he knows that.’

In return for this complimentary address, a very gruff hoarse voice
bade Mr Groves ‘hold his noise and light a candle.’  And the same voice
remarked that the same gentleman ‘needn’t waste his breath in brag, for
most people knew pretty well what sort of stuff he was made of.’

‘Nell, they’re--they’re playing cards,’ whispered the old man, suddenly
interested.  ‘Don’t you hear them?’

‘Look sharp with that candle,’ said the voice; ‘it’s as much as I can
do to see the pips on the cards as it is; and get this shutter closed
as quick as you can, will you?  Your beer will be the worse for
to-night’s thunder I expect.--Game!  Seven-and-sixpence to me, old
Isaac.  Hand over.’

‘Do you hear, Nell, do you hear them?’ whispered the old man again,
with increased earnestness, as the money chinked upon the table.

‘I haven’t seen such a storm as this,’ said a sharp cracked voice of
most disagreeable quality, when a tremendous peal of thunder had died
away, ‘since the night when old Luke Withers won thirteen times running
on the red.  We all said he had the Devil’s luck and his own, and as it
was the kind of night for the Devil to be out and busy, I suppose he
was looking over his shoulder, if anybody could have seen him.’

‘Ah!’ returned the gruff voice; ‘for all old Luke’s winning through
thick and thin of late years, I remember the time when he was the
unluckiest and unfortunatest of men.  He never took a dice-box in his
hand, or held a card, but he was plucked, pigeoned, and cleaned out
completely.’

‘Do you hear what he says?’ whispered the old man.  ‘Do you hear that,
Nell?’

The child saw with astonishment and alarm that his whole appearance had
undergone a complete change.  His face was flushed and eager, his eyes
were strained, his teeth set, his breath came short and thick, and the
hand he laid upon her arm trembled so violently that she shook beneath
its grasp.

‘Bear witness,’ he muttered, looking upward, ‘that I always said it;
that I knew it, dreamed of it, felt it was the truth, and that it must
be so!  What money have we, Nell?  Come!  I saw you with money
yesterday.  What money have we?  Give it to me.’

‘No, no, let me keep it, grandfather,’ said the frightened child.  ‘Let
us go away from here.  Do not mind the rain.  Pray let us go.’

‘Give it to me, I say,’ returned the old man fiercely.  ‘Hush, hush,
don’t cry, Nell.  If I spoke sharply, dear, I didn’t mean it.  It’s for
thy good.  I have wronged thee, Nell, but I will right thee yet, I will
indeed.  Where is the money?’

‘Do not take it,’ said the child.  ‘Pray do not take it, dear.  For
both our sakes let me keep it, or let me throw it away--better let me
throw it away, than you take it now.  Let us go; do let us go.’

‘Give me the money,’ returned the old man, ‘I must have it.
There--there--that’s my dear Nell.  I’ll right thee one day, child,
I’ll right thee, never fear!’

She took from her pocket a little purse.  He seized it with the same
rapid impatience which had characterised his speech, and hastily made
his way to the other side of the screen.  It was impossible to restrain
him, and the trembling child followed close behind.

The landlord had placed a light upon the table, and was engaged in
drawing the curtain of the window.  The speakers whom they had heard
were two men, who had a pack of cards and some silver money between
them, while upon the screen itself the games they had played were
scored in chalk.  The man with the rough voice was a burly fellow of
middle age, with large black whiskers, broad cheeks, a coarse wide
mouth, and bull neck, which was pretty freely displayed as his shirt
collar was only confined by a loose red neckerchief.  He wore his hat,
which was of a brownish-white, and had beside him a thick knotted
stick.  The other man, whom his companion had called Isaac, was of a
more slender figure--stooping, and high in the shoulders--with a very
ill-favoured face, and a most sinister and villainous squint.

‘Now old gentleman,’ said Isaac, looking round.  ‘Do you know either of
us?  This side of the screen is private, sir.’

‘No offence, I hope,’ returned the old man.

‘But by G--, sir, there is offence,’ said the other, interrupting him,
‘when you intrude yourself upon a couple of gentlemen who are
particularly engaged.’

‘I had no intention to offend,’ said the old man, looking anxiously at
the cards.  ‘I thought that--’

‘But you had no right to think, sir,’ retorted the other.  ‘What the
devil has a man at your time of life to do with thinking?’

‘Now bully boy,’ said the stout man, raising his eyes from his cards
for the first time, ‘can’t you let him speak?’

The landlord, who had apparently resolved to remain neutral until he
knew which side of the question the stout man would espouse, chimed in
at this place with ‘Ah, to be sure, can’t you let him speak, Isaac
List?’

‘Can’t I let him speak,’ sneered Isaac in reply, mimicking as nearly as
he could, in his shrill voice, the tones of the landlord.  ‘Yes, I can
let him speak, Jemmy Groves.’

‘Well then, do it, will you?’ said the landlord.

Mr List’s squint assumed a portentous character, which seemed to
threaten a prolongation of this controversy, when his companion, who
had been looking sharply at the old man, put a timely stop to it.

‘Who knows,’ said he, with a cunning look, ‘but the gentleman may have
civilly meant to ask if he might have the honour to take a hand with
us!’

‘I did mean it,’ cried the old man.  ‘That is what I mean.  That is
what I want now!’

‘I thought so,’ returned the same man.  ‘Then who knows but the
gentleman, anticipating our objection to play for love, civilly desired
to play for money?’

The old man replied by shaking the little purse in his eager hand, and
then throwing it down upon the table, and gathering up the cards as a
miser would clutch at gold.

‘Oh!  That indeed,’ said Isaac; ‘if that’s what the gentleman meant, I
beg the gentleman’s pardon.  Is this the gentleman’s little purse?  A
very pretty little purse.  Rather a light purse,’ added Isaac, throwing
it into the air and catching it dexterously, ‘but enough to amuse a
gentleman for half an hour or so.’

‘We’ll make a four-handed game of it, and take in Groves,’ said the
stout man.  ‘Come, Jemmy.’

The landlord, who conducted himself like one who was well used to such
little parties, approached the table and took his seat.  The child, in
a perfect agony, drew her grandfather aside, and implored him, even
then, to come away.

‘Come; and we may be so happy,’ said the child.

‘We WILL be happy,’ replied the old man hastily.  ‘Let me go, Nell.
The means of happiness are on the cards and the dice.  We must rise
from little winnings to great.  There’s little to be won here; but
great will come in time.  I shall but win back my own, and it’s all for
thee, my darling.’

‘God help us!’ cried the child.  ‘Oh! what hard fortune brought us
here?’

‘Hush!’ rejoined the old man laying his hand upon her mouth, ‘Fortune
will not bear chiding.  We must not reproach her, or she shuns us; I
have found that out.’

‘Now, mister,’ said the stout man.  ‘If you’re not coming yourself,
give us the cards, will you?’

‘I am coming,’ cried the old man.  ‘Sit thee down, Nell, sit thee down
and look on.  Be of good heart, it’s all for thee--all--every penny.
I don’t tell them, no, no, or else they wouldn’t play, dreading the
chance that such a cause must give me.  Look at them.  See what they
are and what thou art.  Who doubts that we must win!’

‘The gentleman has thought better of it, and isn’t coming,’ said Isaac,
making as though he would rise from the table.  ‘I’m sorry the
gentleman’s daunted--nothing venture, nothing have--but the gentleman
knows best.’

‘Why I am ready.  You have all been slow but me,’ said the old man.  ‘I
wonder who is more anxious to begin than I.’

As he spoke he drew a chair to the table; and the other three closing
round it at the same time, the game commenced.

The child sat by, and watched its progress with a troubled mind.
Regardless of the run of luck, and mindful only of the desperate
passion which had its hold upon her grandfather, losses and gains were
to her alike.  Exulting in some brief triumph, or cast down by a
defeat, there he sat so wild and restless, so feverishly and intensely
anxious, so terribly eager, so ravenous for the paltry stakes, that she
could have almost better borne to see him dead.  And yet she was the
innocent cause of all this torture, and he, gambling with such a savage
thirst for gain as the most insatiable gambler never felt, had not one
selfish thought!

On the contrary, the other three--knaves and gamesters by their
trade--while intent upon their game, were yet as cool and quiet as if
every virtue had been centered in their breasts.  Sometimes one would
look up to smile to another, or to snuff the feeble candle, or to
glance at the lightning as it shot through the open window and
fluttering curtain, or to listen to some louder peal of thunder than
the rest, with a kind of momentary impatience, as if it put him out;
but there they sat, with a calm indifference to everything but their
cards, perfect philosophers in appearance, and with no greater show of
passion or excitement than if they had been made of stone.

The storm had raged for full three hours; the lightning had grown
fainter and less frequent; the thunder, from seeming to roll and break
above their heads, had gradually died away into a deep hoarse distance;
and still the game went on, and still the anxious child was quite
forgotten.




CHAPTER 30

At length the play came to an end, and Mr Isaac List rose the only
winner.  Mat and the landlord bore their losses with professional
fortitude.  Isaac pocketed his gains with the air of a man who had
quite made up his mind to win, all along, and was neither surprised nor
pleased.

Nell’s little purse was exhausted; but although it lay empty by his
side, and the other players had now risen from the table, the old man
sat poring over the cards, dealing them as they had been dealt before,
and turning up the different hands to see what each man would have held
if they had still been playing.  He was quite absorbed in this
occupation, when the child drew near and laid her hand upon his
shoulder, telling him it was near midnight.

‘See the curse of poverty, Nell,’ he said, pointing to the packs he had
spread out upon the table.  ‘If I could have gone on a little longer,
only a little longer, the luck would have turned on my side.  Yes, it’s
as plain as the marks upon the cards.  See here--and there--and here
again.’

‘Put them away,’ urged the child.  ‘Try to forget them.’

‘Try to forget them!’ he rejoined, raising his haggard face to hers,
and regarding her with an incredulous stare.  ‘To forget them!  How are
we ever to grow rich if I forget them?’

The child could only shake her head.

‘No, no, Nell,’ said the old man, patting her cheek; ‘they must not be
forgotten.  We must make amends for this as soon as we can.
Patience--patience, and we’ll right thee yet, I promise thee.  Lose
to-day, win to-morrow.  And nothing can be won without anxiety and
care--nothing.  Come, I am ready.’

‘Do you know what the time is?’ said Mr Groves, who was smoking with
his friends.  ‘Past twelve o’clock--’

‘--And a rainy night,’ added the stout man.

‘The Valiant Soldier, by James Groves.  Good beds.  Cheap entertainment
for man and beast,’ said Mr Groves, quoting his sign-board.  ‘Half-past
twelve o’clock.’

‘It’s very late,’ said the uneasy child.  ‘I wish we had gone before.
What will they think of us!  It will be two o’clock by the time we get
back.  What would it cost, sir, if we stopped here?’

‘Two good beds, one-and-sixpence; supper and beer one shilling; total
two shillings and sixpence,’ replied the Valiant Soldier.

Now, Nell had still the piece of gold sewn in her dress; and when she
came to consider the lateness of the hour, and the somnolent habits of
Mrs Jarley, and to imagine the state of consternation in which they
would certainly throw that good lady by knocking her up in the middle
of the night--and when she reflected, on the other hand, that if they
remained where they were, and rose early in the morning, they might get
back before she awoke, and could plead the violence of the storm by
which they had been overtaken, as a good apology for their absence--she
decided, after a great deal of hesitation, to remain.  She therefore
took her grandfather aside, and telling him that she had still enough
left to defray the cost of their lodging, proposed that they should
stay there for the night.

‘If I had had but that money before--If I had only known of it a few
minutes ago!’ muttered the old man.

‘We will decide to stop here if you please,’ said Nell, turning hastily
to the landlord.

‘I think that’s prudent,’ returned Mr Groves.  ‘You shall have your
suppers directly.’

Accordingly, when Mr Groves had smoked his pipe out, knocked out the
ashes, and placed it carefully in a corner of the fire-place, with the
bowl downwards, he brought in the bread and cheese, and beer, with many
high encomiums upon their excellence, and bade his guests fall to, and
make themselves at home.  Nell and her grandfather ate sparingly, for
both were occupied with their own reflections; the other gentlemen, for
whose constitutions beer was too weak and tame a liquid, consoled
themselves with spirits and tobacco.

As they would leave the house very early in the morning, the child was
anxious to pay for their entertainment before they retired to bed.  But
as she felt the necessity of concealing her little hoard from her
grandfather, and had to change the piece of gold, she took it secretly
from its place of concealment, and embraced an opportunity of following
the landlord when he went out of the room, and tendered it to him in
the little bar.

‘Will you give me the change here, if you please?’ said the child.

Mr James Groves was evidently surprised, and looked at the money, and
rang it, and looked at the child, and at the money again, as though he
had a mind to inquire how she came by it.  The coin being genuine,
however, and changed at his house, he probably felt, like a wise
landlord, that it was no business of his.  At any rate, he counted out
the change, and gave it her.  The child was returning to the room where
they had passed the evening, when she fancied she saw a figure just
gliding in at the door.  There was nothing but a long dark passage
between this door and the place where she had changed the money, and,
being very certain that no person had passed in or out while she stood
there, the thought struck her that she had been watched.

But by whom?  When she re-entered the room, she found its inmates
exactly as she had left them.  The stout fellow lay upon two chairs,
resting his head on his hand, and the squinting man reposed in a
similar attitude on the opposite side of the table.  Between them sat
her grandfather, looking intently at the winner with a kind of hungry
admiration, and hanging upon his words as if he were some superior
being.  She was puzzled for a moment, and looked round to see if any
else were there.  No.  Then she asked her grandfather in a whisper
whether anybody had left the room while she was absent.  ‘No,’ he said,
‘nobody.’

It must have been her fancy then; and yet it was strange, that, without
anything in her previous thoughts to lead to it, she should have
imagined this figure so very distinctly.  She was still wondering and
thinking of it, when a girl came to light her to bed.

The old man took leave of the company at the same time, and they went
up stairs together.  It was a great, rambling house, with dull
corridors and wide staircases which the flaring candles seemed to make
more gloomy.  She left her grandfather in his chamber, and followed her
guide to another, which was at the end of a passage, and approached by
some half-dozen crazy steps.  This was prepared for her.  The girl
lingered a little while to talk, and tell her grievances.  She had not
a good place, she said; the wages were low, and the work was hard.  She
was going to leave it in a fortnight; the child couldn’t recommend her
to another, she supposed?  Instead she was afraid another would be
difficult to get after living there, for the house had a very
indifferent character; there was far too much card-playing, and such
like.  She was very much mistaken if some of the people who came there
oftenest were quite as honest as they might be, but she wouldn’t have
it known that she had said so, for the world.  Then there were some
rambling allusions to a rejected sweetheart, who had threatened to go a
soldiering--a final promise of knocking at the door early in the
morning--and ‘Good night.’

The child did not feel comfortable when she was left alone.  She could
not help thinking of the figure stealing through the passage down
stairs; and what the girl had said did not tend to reassure her.  The
men were very ill-looking.  They might get their living by robbing and
murdering travellers.  Who could tell?

Reasoning herself out of these fears, or losing sight of them for a
little while, there came the anxiety to which the adventures of the
night gave rise.  Here was the old passion awakened again in her
grandfather’s breast, and to what further distraction it might tempt
him Heaven only knew.  What fears their absence might have occasioned
already!  Persons might be seeking for them even then.  Would they be
forgiven in the morning, or turned adrift again!  Oh!  why had they
stopped in that strange place?  It would have been better, under any
circumstances, to have gone on!

At last, sleep gradually stole upon her--a broken, fitful sleep,
troubled by dreams of falling from high towers, and waking with a start
and in great terror.  A deeper slumber followed this--and then--What!
That figure in the room.

A figure was there.  Yes, she had drawn up the blind to admit the light
when it should be dawn, and there, between the foot of the bed and the
dark casement, it crouched and slunk along, groping its way with
noiseless hands, and stealing round the bed.  She had no voice to cry
for help, no power to move, but lay still, watching it.

On it came--on, silently and stealthily, to the bed’s head.  The breath
so near her pillow, that she shrunk back into it, lest those wandering
hands should light upon her face.  Back again it stole to the
window--then turned its head towards her.

The dark form was a mere blot upon the lighter darkness of the room,
but she saw the turning of the head, and felt and knew how the eyes
looked and the ears listened.  There it remained, motionless as she.
At length, still keeping the face towards her, it busied its hands in
something, and she heard the chink of money.

Then, on it came again, silent and stealthy as before, and replacing
the garments it had taken from the bedside, dropped upon its hands and
knees, and crawled away.  How slowly it seemed to move, now that she
could hear but not see it, creeping along the floor!  It reached the
door at last, and stood upon its feet.  The steps creaked beneath its
noiseless tread, and it was gone.

The first impulse of the child was to fly from the terror of being by
herself in that room--to have somebody by--not to be alone--and then
her power of speech would be restored.  With no consciousness of having
moved, she gained the door.

There was the dreadful shadow, pausing at the bottom of the steps.

She could not pass it; she might have done so, perhaps, in the darkness
without being seized, but her blood curdled at the thought.  The figure
stood quite still, and so did she; not boldly, but of necessity; for
going back into the room was hardly less terrible than going on.

The rain beat fast and furiously without, and ran down in plashing
streams from the thatched roof.  Some summer insect, with no escape
into the air, flew blindly to and fro, beating its body against the
walls and ceiling, and filling the silent place with murmurs.  The
figure moved again.  The child involuntarily did the same.  Once in her
grandfather’s room, she would be safe.

It crept along the passage until it came to the very door she longed so
ardently to reach.  The child, in the agony of being so near, had
almost darted forward with the design of bursting into the room and
closing it behind her, when the figure stopped again.

The idea flashed suddenly upon her--what if it entered there, and had a
design upon the old man’s life!  She turned faint and sick.  It did.
It went in.  There was a light inside.  The figure was now within the
chamber, and she, still dumb--quite dumb, and almost senseless--stood
looking on.

The door was partly open.  Not knowing what she meant to do, but
meaning to preserve him or be killed herself, she staggered forward and
looked in. What sight was that which met her view!

The bed had not been lain on, but was smooth and empty.  And at a table
sat the old man himself; the only living creature there; his white face
pinched and sharpened by the greediness which made his eyes unnaturally
bright--counting the money of which his hands had robbed her.




CHAPTER 31

With steps more faltering and unsteady than those with which she had
approached the room, the child withdrew from the door, and groped her
way back to her own chamber.  The terror she had lately felt was
nothing compared with that which now oppressed her.  No strange robber,
no treacherous host conniving at the plunder of his guests, or stealing
to their beds to kill them in their sleep, no nightly prowler, however
terrible and cruel, could have awakened in her bosom half the dread
which the recognition of her silent visitor inspired.  The grey-headed
old man gliding like a ghost into her room and acting the thief while
he supposed her fast asleep, then bearing off his prize and hanging
over it with the ghastly exultation she had witnessed, was
worse--immeasurably worse, and far more dreadful, for the moment, to
reflect upon--than anything her wildest fancy could have suggested.
If he should return--there was no lock or bolt upon the door, and if,
distrustful of having left some money yet behind, he should come back
to seek for more--a vague awe and horror surrounded the idea of his
slinking in again with stealthy tread, and turning his face toward the
empty bed, while she shrank down close at his feet to avoid his touch,
which was almost insupportable.  She sat and listened.  Hark!  A
footstep on the stairs, and now the door was slowly opening.  It was
but imagination, yet imagination had all the terrors of reality; nay,
it was worse, for the reality would have come and gone, and there an
end, but in imagination it was always coming, and never went away.

The feeling which beset the child was one of dim uncertain horror.  She
had no fear of the dear old grandfather, in whose love for her this
disease of the brain had been engendered; but the man she had seen that
night, wrapt in the game of chance, lurking in her room, and counting
the money by the glimmering light, seemed like another creature in his
shape, a monstrous distortion of his image, a something to recoil from,
and be the more afraid of, because it bore a likeness to him, and kept
close about her, as he did.  She could scarcely connect her own
affectionate companion, save by his loss, with this old man, so like
yet so unlike him.  She had wept to see him dull and quiet.  How much
greater cause she had for weeping now!

The child sat watching and thinking of these things, until the phantom
in her mind so increased in gloom and terror, that she felt it would be
a relief to hear the old man’s voice, or, if he were asleep, even to
see him, and banish some of the fears that clustered round his image.
She stole down the stairs and passage again.  The door was still ajar
as she had left it, and the candle burning as before.

She had her own candle in her hand, prepared to say, if he were waking,
that she was uneasy and could not rest, and had come to see if his were
still alight.  Looking into the room, she saw him lying calmly on his
bed, and so took courage to enter.

Fast asleep.  No passion in the face, no avarice, no anxiety, no wild
desire; all gentle, tranquil, and at peace.  This was not the gambler,
or the shadow in her room; this was not even the worn and jaded man
whose face had so often met her own in the grey morning light; this was
her dear old friend, her harmless fellow-traveller, her good, kind
grandfather.

She had no fear as she looked upon his slumbering features, but she had
a deep and weighty sorrow, and it found its relief in tears.

‘God bless him!’ said the child, stooping softly to kiss his placid
cheek.  ‘I see too well now, that they would indeed part us if they
found us out, and shut him up from the light of the sun and sky.  He
has only me to help him.  God bless us both!’

Lighting her candle, she retreated as silently as she had come, and,
gaining her own room once more, sat up during the remainder of that
long, long, miserable night.

At last the day turned her waning candle pale, and she fell asleep.
She was quickly roused by the girl who had shown her up to bed; and, as
soon as she was dressed, prepared to go down to her grandfather.  But
first she searched her pocket and found that her money was all
gone--not a sixpence remained.

The old man was ready, and in a few seconds they were on their road.
The child thought he rather avoided her eye, and appeared to expect
that she would tell him of her loss.  She felt she must do that, or he
might suspect the truth.

‘Grandfather,’ she said in a tremulous voice, after they had walked
about a mile in silence, ‘do you think they are honest people at the
house yonder?’

‘Why?’ returned the old man trembling.  ‘Do I think them honest--yes,
they played honestly.’

‘I’ll tell you why I ask,’ rejoined Nell.  ‘I lost some money last
night--out of my bedroom, I am sure.  Unless it was taken by somebody
in jest--only in jest, dear grandfather, which would make me laugh
heartily if I could but know it--’

‘Who would take money in jest?’ returned the old man in a hurried
manner.  ‘Those who take money, take it to keep.  Don’t talk of jest.’

‘Then it was stolen out of my room, dear,’ said the child, whose last
hope was destroyed by the manner of this reply.

‘But is there no more, Nell?’ said the old man; ‘no more anywhere?  Was
it all taken--every farthing of it--was there nothing left?’

‘Nothing,’ replied the child.

‘We must get more,’ said the old man, ‘we must earn it, Nell, hoard it
up, scrape it together, come by it somehow.  Never mind this loss.
Tell nobody of it, and perhaps we may regain it.  Don’t ask how;--we
may regain it, and a great deal more;--but tell nobody, or trouble may
come of it.  And so they took it out of thy room, when thou wert
asleep!’ he added in a compassionate tone, very different from the
secret, cunning way in which he had spoken until now.  ‘Poor Nell, poor
little Nell!’

The child hung down her head and wept.  The sympathising tone in which
he spoke, was quite sincere; she was sure of that.  It was not the
lightest part of her sorrow to know that this was done for her.

‘Not a word about it to any one but me,’ said the old man, ‘no, not
even to me,’ he added hastily, ‘for it can do no good.  All the losses
that ever were, are not worth tears from thy eyes, darling.  Why should
they be, when we will win them back?’

‘Let them go,’ said the child looking up.  ‘Let them go, once and for
ever, and I would never shed another tear if every penny had been a
thousand pounds.’

‘Well, well,’ returned the old man, checking himself as some impetuous
answer rose to his lips, ‘she knows no better.  I ought to be thankful
of it.’

‘But listen to me,’ said the child earnestly, ‘will you listen to me?’

‘Aye, aye, I’ll listen,’ returned the old man, still without looking at
her; ‘a pretty voice.  It has always a sweet sound to me.  It always
had when it was her mother’s, poor child.’

‘Let me persuade you, then--oh, do let me persuade you,’ said the
child, ‘to think no more of gains or losses, and to try no fortune but
the fortune we pursue together.’

‘We pursue this aim together,’ retorted her grandfather, still looking
away and seeming to confer with himself.  ‘Whose image sanctifies the
game?’

‘Have we been worse off,’ resumed the child, ‘since you forgot these
cares, and we have been travelling on together?  Have we not been much
better and happier without a home to shelter us, than ever we were in
that unhappy house, when they were on your mind?’

‘She speaks the truth,’ murmured the old man in the same tone as
before.  ‘It must not turn me, but it is the truth; no doubt it is.’

‘Only remember what we have been since that bright morning when we
turned our backs upon it for the last time,’ said Nell, ‘only remember
what we have been since we have been free of all those miseries--what
peaceful days and quiet nights we have had--what pleasant times we have
known--what happiness we have enjoyed.  If we have been tired or
hungry, we have been soon refreshed, and slept the sounder for it.
Think what beautiful things we have seen, and how contented we have
felt.  And why was this blessed change?’

He stopped her with a motion of his hand, and bade her talk to him no
more just then, for he was busy.  After a time he kissed her cheek,
still motioning her to silence, and walked on, looking far before him,
and sometimes stopping and gazing with a puckered brow upon the ground,
as if he were painfully trying to collect his disordered thoughts.
Once she saw tears in his eyes.  When he had gone on thus for some
time, he took her hand in his as he was accustomed to do, with nothing
of the violence or animation of his late manner; and so, by degrees so
fine that the child could not trace them, he settled down into his
usual quiet way, and suffered her to lead him where she would.

When they presented themselves in the midst of the stupendous
collection, they found, as Nell had anticipated, that Mrs Jarley was
not yet out of bed, and that, although she had suffered some uneasiness
on their account overnight, and had indeed sat up for them until past
eleven o’clock, she had retired in the persuasion, that, being
overtaken by storm at some distance from home, they had sought the
nearest shelter, and would not return before morning.  Nell immediately
applied herself with great assiduity to the decoration and preparation
of the room, and had the satisfaction of completing her task, and
dressing herself neatly, before the beloved of the Royal Family came
down to breakfast.

‘We haven’t had,’ said Mrs Jarley when the meal was over, ‘more than
eight of Miss Monflathers’s young ladies all the time we’ve been here,
and there’s twenty-six of ‘em, as I was told by the cook when I asked
her a question or two and put her on the free-list.  We must try ‘em
with a parcel of new bills, and you shall take it, my dear, and see
what effect that has upon ‘em.’

The proposed expedition being one of paramount importance, Mrs Jarley
adjusted Nell’s bonnet with her own hands, and declaring that she
certainly did look very pretty, and reflected credit on the
establishment, dismissed her with many commendations, and certain
needful directions as to the turnings on the right which she was to
take, and the turnings on the left which she was to avoid.  Thus
instructed, Nell had no difficulty in finding out Miss Monflathers’s
Boarding and Day Establishment, which was a large house, with a high
wall, and a large garden-gate with a large brass plate, and a small
grating through which Miss Monflathers’s parlour-maid inspected all
visitors before admitting them; for nothing in the shape of a man--no,
not even a milkman--was suffered, without special license, to pass that
gate.  Even the tax-gatherer, who was stout, and wore spectacles and a
broad-brimmed hat, had the taxes handed through the grating.  More
obdurate than gate of adamant or brass, this gate of Miss Monflathers’s
frowned on all mankind.  The very butcher respected it as a gate of
mystery, and left off whistling when he rang the bell.

As Nell approached the awful door, it turned slowly upon its hinges
with a creaking noise, and, forth from the solemn grove beyond, came a
long file of young ladies, two and two, all with open books in their
hands, and some with parasols likewise.  And last of the goodly
procession came Miss Monflathers, bearing herself a parasol of lilac
silk, and supported by two smiling teachers, each mortally envious of
the other, and devoted unto Miss Monflathers.

Confused by the looks and whispers of the girls, Nell stood with
downcast eyes and suffered the procession to pass on, until Miss
Monflathers, bringing up the rear, approached her, when she curtseyed
and presented her little packet; on receipt whereof Miss Monflathers
commanded that the line should halt.

‘You’re the wax-work child, are you not?’ said Miss Monflathers.

‘Yes, ma’am,’ replied Nell, colouring deeply, for the young ladies had
collected about her, and she was the centre on which all eyes were
fixed.

‘And don’t you think you must be a very wicked little child,’ said Miss
Monflathers, who was of rather uncertain temper, and lost no
opportunity of impressing moral truths upon the tender minds of the
young ladies, ‘to be a wax-work child at all?’

Poor Nell had never viewed her position in this light, and not knowing
what to say, remained silent, blushing more deeply than before.

‘Don’t you know,’ said Miss Monflathers, ‘that it’s very naughty and
unfeminine, and a perversion of the properties wisely and benignantly
transmitted to us, with expansive powers to be roused from their
dormant state through the medium of cultivation?’

The two teachers murmured their respectful approval of this
home-thrust, and looked at Nell as though they would have said that
there indeed Miss Monflathers had hit her very hard.  Then they smiled
and glanced at Miss Monflathers, and then, their eyes meeting, they
exchanged looks which plainly said that each considered herself smiler
in ordinary to Miss Monflathers, and regarded the other as having no
right to smile, and that her so doing was an act of presumption and
impertinence.

‘Don’t you feel how naughty it is of you,’ resumed Miss Monflathers,
‘to be a wax-work child, when you might have the proud consciousness of
assisting, to the extent of your infant powers, the manufactures of
your country; of improving your mind by the constant contemplation of
the steam-engine; and of earning a comfortable and independent
subsistence of from two-and-ninepence to three shillings per week?
Don’t you know that the harder you are at work, the happier you are?’

‘“How doth the little--“’ murmured one of the teachers, in quotation
from Doctor Watts.

‘Eh?’ said Miss Monflathers, turning smartly round.  ‘Who said that?’

Of course the teacher who had not said it, indicated the rival who had,
whom Miss Monflathers frowningly requested to hold her peace; by that
means throwing the informing teacher into raptures of joy.

‘The little busy bee,’ said Miss Monflathers, drawing herself up, ‘is
applicable only to genteel children.

  “In books, or work, or healthful play”

is quite right as far as they are concerned; and the work means
painting on velvet, fancy needle-work, or embroidery.  In such cases as
these,’ pointing to Nell, with her parasol, ‘and in the case of all
poor people’s children, we should read it thus:


  “In work, work, work.  In work alway
  Let my first years be past,
  That I may give for ev’ry day
  Some good account at last.”’


A deep hum of applause rose not only from the two teachers, but from
all the pupils, who were equally astonished to hear Miss Monflathers
improvising after this brilliant style; for although she had been long
known as a politician, she had never appeared before as an original
poet.  Just then somebody happened to discover that Nell was crying,
and all eyes were again turned towards her.

There were indeed tears in her eyes, and drawing out her handkerchief
to brush them away, she happened to let it fall.  Before she could
stoop to pick it up, one young lady of about fifteen or sixteen, who
had been standing a little apart from the others, as though she had no
recognised place among them, sprang forward and put it in her hand.
She was gliding timidly away again, when she was arrested by the
governess.

‘It was Miss Edwards who did that, I KNOW,’ said Miss Monflathers
predictively.  ‘Now I am sure that was Miss Edwards.’

It was Miss Edwards, and everybody said it was Miss Edwards, and Miss
Edwards herself admitted that it was.

‘Is it not,’ said Miss Monflathers, putting down her parasol to take a
severer view of the offender, ‘a most remarkable thing, Miss Edwards,
that you have an attachment to the lower classes which always draws you
to their sides; or, rather, is it not a most extraordinary thing that
all I say and do will not wean you from propensities which your
original station in life have unhappily rendered habitual to you, you
extremely vulgar-minded girl?’

‘I really intended no harm, ma’am,’ said a sweet voice.  ‘It was a
momentary impulse, indeed.’

‘An impulse!’ repeated Miss Monflathers scornfully.  ‘I wonder that you
presume to speak of impulses to me’--both the teachers assented--‘I am
astonished’--both the teachers were astonished--‘I suppose it is an
impulse which induces you to take the part of every grovelling and
debased person that comes in your way’--both the teachers supposed so
too.

‘But I would have you know, Miss Edwards,’ resumed the governess in a
tone of increased severity, ‘that you cannot be permitted--if it be
only for the sake of preserving a proper example and decorum in this
establishment--that you cannot be permitted, and that you shall not be
permitted, to fly in the face of your superiors in this exceedingly
gross manner.  If you have no reason to feel a becoming pride before
wax-work children, there are young ladies here who have, and you must
either defer to those young ladies or leave the establishment, Miss
Edwards.’

This young lady, being motherless and poor, was apprenticed at the
school--taught for nothing--teaching others what she learnt, for
nothing--boarded for nothing--lodged for nothing--and set down and
rated as something immeasurably less than nothing, by all the dwellers
in the house.  The servant-maids felt her inferiority, for they were
better treated; free to come and go, and regarded in their stations
with much more respect.  The teachers were infinitely superior, for
they had paid to go to school in their time, and were paid now.  The
pupils cared little for a companion who had no grand stories to tell
about home; no friends to come with post-horses, and be received in all
humility, with cake and wine, by the governess; no deferential servant
to attend and bear her home for the holidays; nothing genteel to talk
about, and nothing to display.  But why was Miss Monflathers always
vexed and irritated with the poor apprentice--how did that come to pass?

Why, the gayest feather in Miss Monflathers’s cap, and the brightest
glory of Miss Monflathers’s school, was a baronet’s daughter--the real
live daughter of a real live baronet--who, by some extraordinary
reversal of the Laws of Nature, was not only plain in features but dull
in intellect, while the poor apprentice had both a ready wit, and a
handsome face and figure.  It seems incredible.  Here was Miss Edwards,
who only paid a small premium which had been spent long ago, every day
outshining and excelling the baronet’s daughter, who learned all the
extras (or was taught them all) and whose half-yearly bill came to
double that of any other young lady’s in the school, making no account
of the honour and reputation of her pupilage.  Therefore, and because
she was a dependent, Miss Monflathers had a great dislike to Miss
Edwards, and was spiteful to her, and aggravated by her, and, when she
had compassion on little Nell, verbally fell upon and maltreated her as
we have already seen.

‘You will not take the air to-day, Miss Edwards,’ said Miss
Monflathers.  ‘Have the goodness to retire to your own room, and not to
leave it without permission.’

The poor girl was moving hastily away, when she was suddenly, in
nautical phrase, ‘brought to’ by a subdued shriek from Miss Monflathers.

‘She has passed me without any salute!’ cried the governess, raising
her eyes to the sky.  ‘She has actually passed me without the slightest
acknowledgment of my presence!’

The young lady turned and curtsied.  Nell could see that she raised her
dark eyes to the face of her superior, and that their expression, and
that of her whole attitude for the instant, was one of mute but most
touching appeal against this ungenerous usage.  Miss Monflathers only
tossed her head in reply, and the great gate closed upon a bursting
heart.

‘As for you, you wicked child,’ said Miss Monflathers, turning to Nell,
‘tell your mistress that if she presumes to take the liberty of sending
to me any more, I will write to the legislative authorities and have
her put in the stocks, or compelled to do penance in a white sheet; and
you may depend upon it that you shall certainly experience the
treadmill if you dare to come here again.  Now ladies, on.’

The procession filed off, two and two, with the books and parasols, and
Miss Monflathers, calling the Baronet’s daughter to walk with her and
smooth her ruffled feelings, discarded the two teachers--who by this
time had exchanged their smiles for looks of sympathy--and left them
to bring up the rear, and hate each other a little more for being
obliged to walk together.




CHAPTER 32

Mrs Jarley’s wrath on first learning that she had been threatened with
the indignity of Stocks and Penance, passed all description.  The
genuine and only Jarley exposed to public scorn, jeered by children,
and flouted by beadles!  The delight of the Nobility and Gentry shorn
of a bonnet which a Lady Mayoress might have sighed to wear, and
arrayed in a white sheet as a spectacle of mortification and humility!
And Miss Monflathers, the audacious creature who presumed, even in the
dimmest and remotest distance of her imagination, to conjure up the
degrading picture, ‘I am a’most inclined,’ said Mrs Jarley, bursting
with the fulness of her anger and the weakness of her means of revenge,
‘to turn atheist when I think of it!’

But instead of adopting this course of retaliation, Mrs Jarley, on
second thoughts, brought out the suspicious bottle, and ordering
glasses to be set forth upon her favourite drum, and sinking into a
chair behind it, called her satellites about her, and to them several
times recounted, word for word, the affronts she had received.  This
done, she begged them in a kind of deep despair to drink; then laughed,
then cried, then took a little sip herself, then laughed and cried
again, and took a little more; and so, by degrees, the worthy lady went
on, increasing in smiles and decreasing in tears, until at last she
could not laugh enough at Miss Monflathers, who, from being an object
of dire vexation, became one of sheer ridicule and absurdity.

‘For which of us is best off, I wonder,’ quoth Mrs Jarley, ‘she or me!
It’s only talking, when all is said and done, and if she talks of me in
the stocks, why I can talk of her in the stocks, which is a good deal
funnier if we come to that.  Lord, what does it matter, after all!’

Having arrived at this comfortable frame of mind (to which she had been
greatly assisted by certain short interjectional remarks of the
philosophical George), Mrs Jarley consoled Nell with many kind words,
and requested as a personal favour that whenever she thought of Miss
Monflathers, she would do nothing else but laugh at her, all the days
of her life.

So ended Mrs Jarley’s wrath, which subsided long before the going down
of the sun.  Nell’s anxieties, however, were of a deeper kind, and the
checks they imposed upon her cheerfulness were not so easily removed.

That evening, as she had dreaded, her grandfather stole away, and did
not come back until the night was far spent.  Worn out as she was, and
fatigued in mind and body, she sat up alone, counting the minutes,
until he returned--penniless, broken-spirited, and wretched, but still
hotly bent upon his infatuation.

‘Get me money,’ he said wildly, as they parted for the night.  ‘I must
have money, Nell.  It shall be paid thee back with gallant interest one
day, but all the money that comes into thy hands, must be mine--not for
myself, but to use for thee.  Remember, Nell, to use for thee!’

What could the child do with the knowledge she had, but give him every
penny that came into her hands, lest he should be tempted on to rob
their benefactress?  If she told the truth (so thought the child) he
would be treated as a madman; if she did not supply him with money, he
would supply himself; supplying him, she fed the fire that burnt him
up, and put him perhaps beyond recovery.  Distracted by these thoughts,
borne down by the weight of the sorrow which she dared not tell,
tortured by a crowd of apprehensions whenever the old man was absent,
and dreading alike his stay and his return, the colour forsook her
cheek, her eye grew dim, and her heart was oppressed and heavy.  All
her old sorrows had come back upon her, augmented by new fears and
doubts; by day they were ever present to her mind; by night they
hovered round her pillow, and haunted her in dreams.

It was natural that, in the midst of her affliction, she should often
revert to that sweet young lady of whom she had only caught a hasty
glance, but whose sympathy, expressed in one slight brief action, dwelt
in her memory like the kindnesses of years.  She would often think, if
she had such a friend as that to whom to tell her griefs, how much
lighter her heart would be--that if she were but free to hear that
voice, she would be happier.  Then she would wish that she were
something better, that she were not quite so poor and humble, that she
dared address her without fearing a repulse; and then feel that there
was an immeasurable distance between them, and have no hope that the
young lady thought of her any more.

It was now holiday-time at the schools, and the young ladies had gone
home, and Miss Monflathers was reported to be flourishing in London,
and damaging the hearts of middle-aged gentlemen, but nobody said
anything about Miss Edwards, whether she had gone home, or whether she
had any home to go to, whether she was still at the school, or anything
about her.  But one evening, as Nell was returning from a lonely walk,
she happened to pass the inn where the stage-coaches stopped, just as
one drove up, and there was the beautiful girl she so well remembered,
pressing forward to embrace a young child whom they were helping down
from the roof.

Well, this was her sister, her little sister, much younger than Nell,
whom she had not seen (so the story went afterwards) for five years,
and to bring whom to that place on a short visit, she had been saving
her poor means all that time.  Nell felt as if her heart would break
when she saw them meet.  They went a little apart from the knot of
people who had congregated about the coach, and fell upon each other’s
neck, and sobbed, and wept with joy.  Their plain and simple dress, the
distance which the child had come alone, their agitation and delight,
and the tears they shed, would have told their history by themselves.

They became a little more composed in a short time, and went away, not
so much hand in hand as clinging to each other.  ‘Are you sure you’re
happy, sister?’ said the child as they passed where Nell was standing.
‘Quite happy now,’ she answered.  ‘But always?’ said the child.  ‘Ah,
sister, why do you turn away your face?’

Nell could not help following at a little distance.  They went to the
house of an old nurse, where the elder sister had engaged a bed-room
for the child.  ‘I shall come to you early every morning,’ she said,
‘and we can be together all the day.’

‘Why not at night-time too? Dear sister, would they be angry with you
for that?’

Why were the eyes of little Nell wet, that night, with tears like those
of the two sisters?  Why did she bear a grateful heart because they had
met, and feel it pain to think that they would shortly part?  Let us
not believe that any selfish reference--unconscious though it might
have been--to her own trials awoke this sympathy, but thank God that
the innocent joys of others can strongly move us, and that we, even in
our fallen nature, have one source of pure emotion which must be prized
in Heaven!

By morning’s cheerful glow, but oftener still by evening’s gentle
light, the child, with a respect for the short and happy intercourse of
these two sisters which forbade her to approach and say a thankful
word, although she yearned to do so, followed them at a distance in
their walks and rambles, stopping when they stopped, sitting on the
grass when they sat down, rising when they went on, and feeling it a
companionship and delight to be so near them.  Their evening walk was
by a river’s side.  Here, every night, the child was too, unseen by
them, unthought of, unregarded; but feeling as if they were her
friends, as if they had confidences and trusts together, as if her load
were lightened and less hard to bear; as if they mingled their sorrows,
and found mutual consolation.  It was a weak fancy perhaps, the
childish fancy of a young and lonely creature; but night after night,
and still the sisters loitered in the same place, and still the child
followed with a mild and softened heart.

She was much startled, on returning home one night, to find that Mrs
Jarley had commanded an announcement to be prepared, to the effect that
the stupendous collection would only remain in its present quarters one
day longer; in fulfilment of which threat (for all announcements
connected with public amusements are well known to be irrevocable and
most exact), the stupendous collection shut up next day.

‘Are we going from this place directly, ma’am?’ said Nell.

‘Look here, child,’ returned Mrs Jarley.  ‘That’ll inform you.’ And so
saying Mrs Jarley produced another announcement, wherein it was stated,
that, in consequence of numerous inquiries at the wax-work door, and in
consequence of crowds having been disappointed in obtaining admission,
the Exhibition would be continued for one week longer, and would
re-open next day.

‘For now that the schools are gone, and the regular sight-seers
exhausted,’ said Mrs Jarley, ‘we come to the General Public, and they
want stimulating.’

Upon the following day at noon, Mrs Jarley established herself behind
the highly-ornamented table, attended by the distinguished effigies
before mentioned, and ordered the doors to be thrown open for the
readmission of a discerning and enlightened public.  But the first
day’s operations were by no means of a successful character, inasmuch
as the general public, though they manifested a lively interest in Mrs
Jarley personally, and such of her waxen satellites as were to be seen
for nothing, were not affected by any impulses moving them to the
payment of sixpence a head.  Thus, notwithstanding that a great many
people continued to stare at the entry and the figures therein
displayed; and remained there with great perseverance, by the hour at a
time, to hear the barrel-organ played and to read the bills; and
notwithstanding that they were kind enough to recommend their friends
to patronise the exhibition in the like manner, until the door-way was
regularly blockaded by half the population of the town, who, when they
went off duty, were relieved by the other half; it was not found that
the treasury was any the richer, or that the prospects of the
establishment were at all encouraging.

In this depressed state of the classical market, Mrs Jarley made
extraordinary efforts to stimulate the popular taste, and whet the
popular curiosity.  Certain machinery in the body of the nun on the
leads over the door was cleaned up and put in motion, so that the
figure shook its head paralytically all day long, to the great
admiration of a drunken, but very Protestant, barber over the way, who
looked upon the said paralytic motion as typical of the degrading
effect wrought upon the human mind by the ceremonies of the Romish
Church and discoursed upon that theme with great eloquence and
morality.  The two carters constantly passed in and out of the
exhibition-room, under various disguises, protesting aloud that the
sight was better worth the money than anything they had beheld in all
their lives, and urging the bystanders, with tears in their eyes, not
to neglect such a brilliant gratification.  Mrs Jarley sat in the
pay-place, chinking silver moneys from noon till night, and solemnly
calling upon the crowd to take notice that the price of admission was
only sixpence, and that the departure of the whole collection, on a
short tour among the Crowned Heads of Europe, was positively fixed for
that day week.

‘So be in time, be in time, be in time,’ said Mrs Jarley at the close
of every such address.  ‘Remember that this is Jarley’s stupendous
collection of upwards of One Hundred Figures, and that it is the only
collection in the world; all others being imposters and deceptions.  Be
in time, be in time, be in time!’




CHAPTER 33

As the course of this tale requires that we should become acquainted,
somewhere hereabouts, with a few particulars connected with the
domestic economy of Mr Sampson Brass, and as a more convenient place
than the present is not likely to occur for that purpose, the historian
takes the friendly reader by the hand, and springing with him into the
air, and cleaving the same at a greater rate than ever Don Cleophas
Leandro Perez Zambullo and his familiar travelled through that pleasant
region in company, alights with him upon the pavement of Bevis Marks.

The intrepid aeronauts alight before a small dark house, once the
residence of Mr Sampson Brass.

In the parlour window of this little habitation, which is so close upon
the footway that the passenger who takes the wall brushes the dim glass
with his coat sleeve--much to its improvement, for it is very dirty--in
this parlour window in the days of its occupation by Sampson Brass,
there hung, all awry and slack, and discoloured by the sun, a curtain
of faded green, so threadbare from long service as by no means to
intercept the view of the little dark room, but rather to afford a
favourable medium through which to observe it accurately.  There was
not much to look at.  A rickety table, with spare bundles of papers,
yellow and ragged from long carriage in the pocket, ostentatiously
displayed upon its top; a couple of stools set face to face on opposite
sides of this crazy piece of furniture; a treacherous old chair by the
fire-place, whose withered arms had hugged full many a client and
helped to squeeze him dry; a second-hand wig box, used as a depository
for blank writs and declarations and other small forms of law, once the
sole contents of the head which belonged to the wig which belonged to
the box, as they were now of the box itself; two or three common books
of practice; a jar of ink, a pounce box, a stunted hearth-broom, a
carpet trodden to shreds but still clinging with the tightness of
desperation to its tacks--these, with the yellow wainscot of the walls,
the smoke-discoloured ceiling, the dust and cobwebs, were among the
most prominent decorations of the office of Mr Sampson Brass.

But this was mere still-life, of no greater importance than the plate,
‘BRASS, Solicitor,’ upon the door, and the bill, ‘First floor to let to
a single gentleman,’ which was tied to the knocker.  The office
commonly held two examples of animated nature, more to the purpose of
this history, and in whom it has a stronger interest and more
particular concern.

Of these, one was Mr Brass himself, who has already appeared in these
pages.  The other was his clerk, assistant, housekeeper, secretary,
confidential plotter, adviser, intriguer, and bill of cost increaser,
Miss Brass--a kind of amazon at common law, of whom it may be desirable
to offer a brief description.

Miss Sally Brass, then, was a lady of thirty-five or thereabouts, of a
gaunt and bony figure, and a resolute bearing, which if it repressed
the softer emotions of love, and kept admirers at a distance, certainly
inspired a feeling akin to awe in the breasts of those male strangers
who had the happiness to approach her.  In face she bore a striking
resemblance to her brother, Sampson--so exact, indeed, was the likeness
between them, that had it consorted with Miss Brass’s maiden modesty
and gentle womanhood to have assumed her brother’s clothes in a frolic
and sat down beside him, it would have been difficult for the oldest
friend of the family to determine which was Sampson and which Sally,
especially as the lady carried upon her upper lip certain reddish
demonstrations, which, if the imagination had been assisted by her
attire, might have been mistaken for a beard.  These were, however, in
all probability, nothing more than eyelashes in a wrong place, as the
eyes of Miss Brass were quite free from any such natural
impertinencies.  In complexion Miss Brass was sallow--rather a dirty
sallow, so to speak--but this hue was agreeably relieved by the healthy
glow which mantled in the extreme tip of her laughing nose.  Her voice
was exceedingly impressive--deep and rich in quality, and, once heard,
not easily forgotten.  Her usual dress was a green gown, in colour not
un